REVIVAL  OF  RELIGIOUS  LEARNINGS 
IMAM  GHAZZALI'S 

IHYA  ULUM-ID-DIN 


Translated  by 

FAZL-UL-KARIM 


VOL.1 


Published  by 

DARUL-ISHAAT 

Urdu  Bazar,  Karachi 

Pakistan  -  Phone  :  213768 


L 


§/ ^ 

I  Rights  of  composing  reserved  ) 


Publisher 
DARUL-ISHAAT 

URDU  BAZAR  KARACHI-PAKISTAN. 
Tel :  213768  -  2631861 

First  Edition :  1993 


Composing  at :    KODWAVI  COMPOSING  CENTRE 
Pakistan  Chowk,  Karachi. 


DISTRIBUTORS : 

Bait-ul-Quran  Urdu  Bazar  Karachi-1 
Idara  Tul  Ma'arif,  Darul  Uloom  Korangi  Karachi-14 
Maktaba  Darul  Uloon  Darul  Uloom  Korangi  Karachi-14 
Idara  Tul  Quran  437/D,  G.E.  Lasbella  Karachi-S 
Idara-e-Islamiat  190  Anar  Kali  Lahore. 

also  available  at:- 


Siddxqvi  Trust  Al-Manzar  Apartments 
Lasbella  Karachi-5 


Printed  At: 

AHMAD  PRINTING  CORPORATION  KARACHI. 


v^  0 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE 


About  the  Book 


The  book  is  the  English  version  of  Imam  Ghazzali's  Ihya 
Ulum-ud-Din.  It  deals  with  worship  and  divine  service. 

Imam  Abu-Hamid  al-Ghazzali  is  unquestionably  the 
greatest  theologian  of  Islam  and  one  of  its  noblest  and  most 
original  thinkers.  He  was  born  in  1058  A.D.  at  Tu  s,  where  he  died 
in  1111.  He  reproduced  in  his  religious  experience  all  the 
spiritual  phases  developed  by  Islam. 

Starting  his  relgious  life  as  orthodox,  Al-Ghazzali  soon 
turned  Sufi,  and  when  still  under  twenty  he  had  broken  with  all 
the  past.  In  1091  he  was  appointed  lecturer  at  the  Nizamiyah  in 
Baghdad,  where  he  became  a  sceptic.  Four  year  later  he  returned 
to  Sufism  after  a  terrific  spiritual  struggle  that  left  him  a  physical 
wreck.  Intellectualism  had  failed  him.  As  a  dervish  he  roamed 
from  place  to  place  enjoying  peace  of  soul  and  acquiescence  of 
mind.  After  about  twelve  years  of  retirement  in  various  places, 
including  two  years  of  retreat  in  Syria  and  a  holy  pilgrimage,  he 
returned  to  Baghdad  to  preach  and  teach.  There  he  composed  his 
masterpiece  lyha  Ulutn-id-Din  (the  revivification  of  the  sciences 
of  religion). 

The  mysticism  of  this  work  vitalized  the  law  its  orthodoxy 
leavened  the  doctrine  of  Islam.  In  it  and  such  other  works  of  his 
as  Fatihal-al-Ulutn,  Tahafut  of  Falasifah,  Iqtisad  fi-al-Itiqad, 
orthodox  speculation  reached  its  culminating  point. 


THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP 

CONTENTS 

Preface  7 

Preface  of  Imam  Gazzali  13 

CHAPTER  I          Acquisition  of  Knowledge  18 

Excellence  of  Learning  24 

Praiseworthy  and  blameworthy  learnings  29 

Four  Imams  38 

Meanings  of  some  words  now  changed  45 

Manners  to  be  observed  by  teachers  and  students  54 

Signs  of  the  learned  of  the  Hereafter  62 

Intellect  and  its  noble  nature  92 

CHAPTER  II         Foundation  of  Belief  99 

Proof  of  belief  103 

Attributes  and  actions  of  God  109 

Rules  of  articles  of  belief  119 

CHAPTER  III        Mysteries  of  Cleanliness  122 

Purification  from  impurites  124 

Purification  of  body  and  mind  126 

Clieansing  the  external  Bodily  growths  1 30 

CHAPTER  IV        Secrets  of  prayer  133 

Stories  of  prayer  of  God  fearing  men  147 

Merits  of  Jumma  Prayer  151 

Optional  prayers  155 

CHAPTER  V         Secrets  of  Zakat  and  charities  163 

Some  subtle  rules  of  Zakat  166 

Merits  of  optional  Charity  176 

CHAPTER  VI        Secrets  of  Fasting  180 

Optional  fasts  and  its  rules  1 86 

CHAPTER  VII       Secrets  of  Pilgrimage  188 

Ten  secret  things  of  Ha)  200 

CHAPTER  VIII      Excellence  of  the  Quran  209 

External  and  internal  rules  of  reciting  212 

Individual  Interpretation  224 

CHAPTER  IX         Zikr  and  Invocations  229 

Rules  of  invocations  239 

Invocations  of  sages  247 

CHAPTERX          Actions  after  division  of  Times  249 

Merits  of  Night  Prayer  25"9 


THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP 

PREFACE 

Through  the  unbounded  grace  of  the  Almighty  God  and 
blessings  of  the  greatest  Apostle  of  God,  the  English  version  of 
the  Book  of  worship  of  the  world  renowned  Ihyaul  Ulum 
(Revival  of  religious  learning)  of  Imam  Ghazzali,  the  greatest 
thinker  of  the  world  of  Islam,  the  Proof  of  Islam,  the  famous  Sufi 
and  devout,  has  now  been  published  in  full.  This  book  Ihya  is  a 
sea  of  knowledge  full  of  reasons  and  arguments,  full  of  Quranic 
verses,  traditions  of  the  Holy  Prophet  and  of  the  companions  and 
the  famous  saints  of  early  ages.  Each  subject  was  supported  by 
the  Quran,  traditions  and  sayings  of  the  learned  sages  and  wise 
men  and  established  by  reasons  and  arguments. 

As  the  great  Imam  belonged  originally  to  the  Shafeyi  Sunni 
sect,  some  of  the  religious  doctrines  will  be  found  in  line  with 
that  sect,  but  nevertheless  its  importance  is  very  great.  In  his 
advanced  age,  the  Imam  was  not  a  blind  follower  of  sects  but 
followed  his  independent  thinking  and  as  such  indirectly 
created  a  sect  of  his  own.  As  the  world  is  advancing  with  ever 
new  ideas  and  scientific  discoveries,  so  also  this  work  is  full  of 
novel  and  great  ideas  and  scientific  discoveries  and  thereby 
the  Imam  revived  truly  the  religious  sciences  and  gave  them 
an  impetus  never  given  by  his  predecessors  in  such  a  manner. 
He  saved  Islam  from  the  currents  and  cross  currents  of 
devilish  thoughts  and  pagan  ideas  that  inperceptibly  entered 
into  Islam  and  clearly  showed  their  fallacies  and 
misconceptions.  For  this  reason,  he  was  given  the  title  of 
Hujjatul  Islam  or  the  Proof  of  Islam.  His  thoughts  prevailed 
upon  those  savants  who  came  after  him.  Had  not  the  Almighty 
blessed  him  with  the  necklace  of  reason  and  intellect,  the  true 
belief  of  Islam  would  have  been  carried  away  by  the  strong 
current  of  irreligious  and  misguided  thoughts. 

True  it  is  that  there  are  many  weak  traditions  in  this  book,  but 
at  the  same  time  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  authors  of  six 
authentic  traditional  books  specially  Bukhari  and  Muslim 
selected  some  few  thousand  traditions  as  most  of  them  were  not 
proved  to  have  been  founded  by  trustworthy  narrators  from  the 
Holy  Prophet  down  to  the  narrator  or  did  not  meet  with  all  the 
rules  laid  down  for  an  authentic  tradition.  For  want  of  proof, 


8  REVIVAL  OF  RELIGIOUS  LEARNINGS  Vol-I 

many  guilty  persons  are  acquitted.  For  that,  it  cannot  be  said  that 
all  acquitted  persons  are  innocent.  So  in  this  perspective,  the 
traditions  in  the  Ihya  should  be  regarded.  Had  Imam  Ghazzali 
not  found  them  trusworthy,  he  would  not  have  incorporated 
them  in  his  book. 

The  present  translation  is  an  attempt  to  bring  out  a  complete 
translation  of  Ihya  in  English  in  four  Books.  The  first  book  deals 
with  worship  and  divine  service,  the  second  book  with  worldly 
usages,  the  third  book  with  destructive  evils  and  the  fourth  book 
with  constructive  virtues.  Ihya  in  original  is  a  book  in  Arabic 
comprising  four  parts  and  its  abridged  addition  in  Persian  was 
termed  by  the  author  himself  as  'Kimiyae  Sa'adaf  or  the 
Touchstone  of  fortune.  Unnecessary  arguments  of  different  sects 
prevalent  nearly  one  thousand  years  ago,  some  matters  not 
needed  at  the  present  time  and  some  sayings  of  some  sages  of  less 
reputation  have  been  omitted  in  the  present  English  version.  The 
book  has  been,  however,  translated  into  Bengali  in  full  by  the 
author  himself  without  ommission. 

SHORT  LIFE  OF  IMAM  GHAZZALI 

Imam  Ghazzali  was  bom  in  450  A.H.  (1058  A.D.)  in  the 
village  Taberan  in  the  district  of  Taus  in  Persia  and  his  name  is 
Abu  Hamid  Muhammad.  His  title  is  Hujjatul  Islam  or  Proof  of 
Islam  and  his  dynastic  title  is  Ghazzali.  His  father  was  not  a 
famous  person  but  his  grand  father  was  one  of  the  leading  men  of 
that  age.  His  father  died  while  he  was  young  leaving  him  under 
the  care  of  his  mother  and  grand  father.  Ghazzal  is  said  to  be  the 
name  of  a  village  in  the  district  of  Taus  in  the  province  of 
Khorasan  in  Persia.  According  to  Maulana  Shibli  Nomani,  his 
ancestors  had  the  business  of  weaving  (Ghazzal)  a"nd  therefore 
he  retained  his  family  title  Ghazzali  (weaver). 

HIS  EDUCATION:  At  the  time  of  the  death  of  Ghazzali's 
father,  he  entrusted  the  education  of  his  two  sons  Muhammad 
and  Ahmad  to  one  of  his  trusted  friends.  The  latter  imparted  to 
them  primary  education  and  then  sent  them  to  a  private  Maktab. 
The  boys  within  a  short  time  committed  the  whole  Quran  to 
memory  and  after  that  began  to  learn  Arabic. 

They  were  then  admitted  in  a  free  Madrasha.  After 
sometime,  Imam  Ghazzali  left  his  native  village  for  higher 


Vol-I  REVIVAL  OF  RELIGIOUS  LEARNINGS  9 

education  for  Zarzan  and  began  to  study  under  a  great  earned 
man  Imam  Abu  Nasr  Ismail.  He  used  to  take  notes  of  his  lectures 
but  in  a  certain  journey  he  was  robbed  of  these  notes  by  some 
dacoits  along  with  his  other  belongings.  He  took  courage,  went 
to  the  chief  of  the  robbers  and  begged  of  the  notes  only  to  be 
returned  to  him.  It  was  returned  to  him  at  his  earnest  entreaties. 

Then  he  joined  Nizamia  Madrasha  at  Nishapur  which  was  a 
reputed  seat  of  learning  and  a  great  educationist  named  Imamul 
Haramain  was  its  principal.  He  had  400  students  of  whom  three 
were  most  noted  -  Harrasi,  Ahmad-b-Muhammad  and  Imam 
Ghazzali.  The  latter  became  so  much  grieved  at  his  death  that  he 
left  Nishapur  and  went  to  Baghdad,  the  capital  of  the  Caliphs.  He 
was  then  a  young  man  of  28  years  of  age. 

At  Baghdad,  he  was  appointed  principal  of  Nizamiyah 
Madrasha  by  Nizamul  Mulk  the  chief  vizier  of  the  Turkish  ruler 
Malek  Shah.  Being  thus  appointed  at  an  early  age  to  such  a  high 
post,  his  popularity  as  a  great  learned  man  spread  far  and  wide 
and  the  rulers  and  the  chieftains  used  to  consult  him  in  state 
affairs  and  theological  matters. 

LECTURES  OF  IMAM  GHAZZALI:  In  the  lectures  of  the 
Imam,  hundreds  of  learned  men  and  dignitaries  of  the  State  and 
even  the  ruling  princes  attended.  His  lectures  were  full  of 
arguments  and  reasons  and  they  were  mostly  recorded  by 
Sayeed-b-Fares  and  Ibn  Lobban.  They  recorded  nearly  183  of  his 
lectures  which  were  completed  in  a  book  named 
Majalesse-Ghazzali. 

The  great  Imam  then  turned  his  mind  to  gain  spiritual 
heights  and  the  circumstances  leading  to  it  were  recorded  by 
him  in  his  book  Munkezum  Minaddalal  (Deliverance  from 
error).  He  was  a  follower  of  Imam  Shafeyi  in  his  early  age  but 
in  Baghdad  he  mixed  freely  with  the  peoples  of  all  sects  and 
thoughts  and  ideas.  There  were  then  the  Shias,  the  Sunnis, 
Zindiqs,  Magians,  Scholastic  theologians,  Christians,  Jews, 
atheists  fire-worshippers  and  idol  worshippes.  There  were  also 
the  Deists,  the  Materialists,  the  Naturalists,  the  philosophers. 
They  used  to  meet  in  mutual  wars  of  argumentations  and 
debates.  This  had  such  an  effect  in  the  mind  of  the  Imam  that  his 
whole  life  became  changed  and  he  began  to  search  for  truth  with 
a  free  mind.  His  old  ideas  disappeared  and  he  began  to  live  in 


10  REVIVAL  OF  RELIGIOUS  LEARNINGS  Vol-I 

doubts.  He  then  became  inclined  to  Sufism  but  here  practical 
actions  were  more  required  than  mere  belief.  Beng  imbued  with 
such  an  idea,  he  gave  up  his  lucrative  post  at  Baghdad,  wore  Sufi 
dress  and  left  Baghdad  suddenly  one  night  in  488  A.H. 

He  then  went  to  Damascus  and  closetted  himself  in  a  room  of 
its  mosque  and  began  attentively  the  divine  services,  meditations 
and  Zikr.  Thus  he  spent  here  two  years  in  solitude.  At  the  age  of 
27  years,  he  was  initiated  by  Pir'Abu  Ali  Farnedi  who  was  the 
spiritual  guide  of  also  the  vizier  Nizamul  Mulk.  After  two  years 
he  went  to  Jerusalem  and  visited  the  birth  place  of  Jesus  Christ 
and  in  499  A.H.  he  visited  the  holy  shrine  of  Hazrat  Abraham  and 
made  there  three  promises:- 1)  he  will  not  go  to  the  Darbar  of  any 
ruler,  2)  he  will  never  accept  their  presentation,  3)  he  will  not  join 
any  religious  debates.  He  fulfilled  these  promises  up  to  his  death. 
Then  he  went  to  Mecca  for  pilgrimage  and  visited  also  Medina 
and  stayed  there  for  a  long  time.  When  he  returned  hdme,  he  was 
requested  by  the  ruler  to  accept  the  post  of  the  principal  of 
Nizamia  Madrashah  and  he  accepted  it.  When  the  ruler  was 
assassinated  by  an  assassin,  he  gave  up  the  post  and  went  to  Tas 
and  closetted  himself  in  a  khankah.  The  new  ruler  requested  the 
Imam  to  join  his  post  of  the  principal  but  he  declined  the  offer. 

He  died  at  his  native  village  Taberan  on  14th  Jamadis  Sani  in 
505  A.H.  corresponding  to  19th  December  1111  A.D.  Ibn  Jauzi 
narrated  a  story  about  his  death.  He  said:  On  Monday  early  in  the 
morning  he  got  up  from  his  bed,  performed  his  morning  prayer 
and  then  sent  a  man  to  bring  his  coffin  cloth.  When  it  was 
brought,  he  lifted  it  up  to  his  eyes  and  said:  Lord's  command  is  to 
be  obeyed.  Saying  this,  he  prolonged  his  legs  and  immediately 
breathed  his  last.  The  Imam  left  no  son,  but  only  daughters. 

HIS  BOOKS:  The  Imam  lived  nearly  55;  years  and  he  began 
to  write  books  from  his  early  age  when  he  was  20  years  old.  He 
travelled  for  nearly  10  to  11  years  and  spent  most  of  his  time  in 
reading,  writing  and  teaching.  Besides  this,  he  had  to  reply  to 
thousand  letters  which  came  from  far  and  near  for  his  decision 
and  opinion.  He  wrote  nearly  400  books  of  which  the  following 
are  noted. 

THEOLOGY:  Wasit  (Shafeyi  jurisprudence),  Basit,  Wajiz 
(Canon  Law)  (compendium),  Bayanul  Qaolaine  li  Shafeyi, 
Khulasatul  Rasail  (Quintessence  of  jurisprudence),  Fkhtesarul 


Vol-I  REVIVAL  OF  RELIGIOUS  LEARNINGS  1 1 

Mukhtesar,  Gayatul  Gaur,  Mazmatul  Fatawah  (collection  of  legal 
decisions),  Risalatul  Qudsiyya  (canon  laws  of  Prophet). 

PRINCIPLES  OF  THEOLOGY:  Tahsinul  Muakhej,  Shefaye 
AHI  (cure  of  diseases),  Mankhul,  Mustastfa  jurisprudence. 

JURISPRUDENCE:  Khulasatul  Fiqh  (quintessence  of 
jurisprudence)  Wajiz,  Iqtisad-fil-I'tiqad  (exposition  of  faith), 
Al-Qaestas  Mustaqim. 

LOGIC:  Mizanul  Amal,  Mihakhul  Nazar  fil  Monteq 
(whetstone  of  reflection  on  Logic),  Mayatul  Ilm  (weighing  scale 
of  science),  Al-Ma'arif  (Discourse  on  Logic).  Mayarul  Ilm  fi 
Fannil  Manteq  (the  weighing  scale  of  the  science  of  logic). 

PHILOSOPHY:  Maqasidul  Falasifah  (aim  of  the 
Philosophers),  Munqezum  Minaddalal  (Deliverence  from  error), 
an  autobiographical  statement  of  his  spiritual  progress)  Kitabul 
Arsayin  (abridgement  of  Ihya),  Resalatul  Laduniyya  (Ilham  and 
wahi). 

SCNOLASTIC  THEOLOGY:  Tahafatul  falasifah  (destruction 
of  the  philosophers),  Iqtisad,  Mustajhari  (guide  of  novices), 
Iljamal  Awam  (vilification  of  peoples),  Faysatul  Zindiq 
(refutation  of  atheists),  Fikhrot  wal  Ibrah  (Meditation  and 
contemplation),  Al  Hikmat  (wisdom  of  God),  Haqiqatur  Ruh 
(realities  of  soul). 

SPIRITUAL  AND  MORAL:  Ihyao  Ulumiddin  (Revival  of 
religious  learnings),  Kimiyae  Sa'adat  (Touch  stone  of  fortune), 
Akhlaklul  Abrar  (conduct  of  the  pious),  Jawaharul  Quran  (Jewels 
of  Quran),  Minhajul  Abedin  (path  of  the  devout),  Mirajus  Saleqin 
(steps  for  the  sojourners),  Bidayataul  Hidayah  (beginning  of 
guidance),  Mishkatul  Anwar  (Niche  of  lights). 

TAFSIR:  Yeakutut-Ta'wil  (a  commentary  of  the  Quran  in  40 
volumes  now  lost). 

Of  the  400  books  he  compiled,  some  only  have  been 
preperved  in  many  libraries  of  Europe,  while  the  Muslims  did 
not  accept  them  as  they  should  have  been  accepted.  Besides,  they 
went  so  far  as  to  burn  some  of  his  books  which  were  lost  forever 
to  the  world. 


12  REVIVAL  OF  RELIGIOUS  LEARNINGS  Vol-I 

IHYA  ULUMIDDIN:  Revival  of  Religious  sciences  is  a 
master  piece  of  Imam  Ghazzali.  Abul  Gafer  Fersi  was  a 
contemporary  of  Imam  Ghazzali.  He  said  that  a  book  like  Ihya 
was  never  compiled  before.  Imam  Nodi  said:  Ihya  is  near  the 
Quran.  Shaikh  Abu  Muhammad  said:  If  all  the  lights  of 
knowledge  of  the  world  are  extinguished  they  can  be  revived 
from  Ihya.  Shaikh  Abdullah  Idrees  was  a  great  saint.  He 
committed  to  memory  the  whole  book  Ihya.  Shaikh  Ali  read  it  25 
times  from  first  to  last  and  at  the  end  of  each  reading  gave  a  feast 
to  the  students  and  the  poor.  Many  students  of  the  Imam 
committed  it  to  memory.  Many  saints  regarded  the  book  as  a 
result  of  Ilham  or  inspiration.  The  great  saint  Kutub  Shaji  one  day 
held  the  book  in  his  hand  and  said  to  the  people:  Do  you  know 
which  book  is  in  my  hand?  Immediately  he  showed  them  the 
signs  of  lashes  on  his  back  and  said:  1  was  not  a  supporter  of  the 
book.  Last  night,  Imam  Ghazzali  took  me  in  presence  of  the  Holy 
Propeht  and  inflicted  on  me  these  lashes  on  my  back  for  my 
disregard  of  the  book.  These  are  the  signs  of  lashes  on  my  back. 

IMAM  GHAZZALI  AND  EUROPE:  The  books  of  Imam 
Ghazzali  was  so  much  accepted  and  honoured  in  Europe  that 
they  preserved  them  in  many  libraries.  But  they  did  not  receive 
so  much  attention  in  Muslim  countries.  Some  Muslim  learned 
men  even  did  not  open  their  eyes  to  see  them,  but  rather 
prohibited  the  people  to  read  them.  For  this  reason,  his  books  are 
rarely  found  in  the  libraries  of  Muslim  countries.  Mankhul  is  a 
book  compiled  by  the  Imam  at  his  early  age.  Therein  he  wrote 
with  completely  free  and  independent  mind  and  was  not  a  blind 
follower  of  Mazhabs  or  sects.  This  book  fell  into  disregard  in 
Muslim  countries  only  for  this  fault.  Mankhul  and  Ihya  were 
ordered  to  be  burnt  and  it  was  translated  into  action.  Europe 
accepted  them  with  honour  and  preserved  them  from 
destruction.  The  book  'Maqasedul  Falasefa'  is  not  found  in 
Muslim  countries  but  it  is  preserved  in  the  libraries  of  Spain, 
Europe  also  accepted  his  other  books. 

GHAZZALI'S  INFLUENCE:  It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that 
the  modern  opinion  about  religion  is  much  due  to  the  influence 
of  the  Imam's  thoughts.  The  many  books  that  were  written  after 
his  death  reflect  greatly  the  thoughts  of  the  great  Imam.  His 
views  on  Sufism  were  accepted  by  the  latter  Sufis.  After  him 
Maulana  Rumi,  Ibne  Rushd,  Shah  Waliullah  and  such  other 


Vol-I  REVIVAL  OF  RELIGIOUS  LEARNINGS  13 

noted  learn  men  wrote  many  books  which  resound  with  the 
opinions  of  Imam  Ghazzali.  In  short,  his  thoughts  reigned 
supreme  in  their  minds.  His  influence  on  Persian  literature  was 
also  great.  He  himself  wrote  Kimiyae  Saadat  in  Persian  which 
influenced  to  a  great  extent  the  minds  of  Maulana  Rural.  Shaikh 
Sa'di,  Farid  Uddin  Attar,  Shiraaji,  Hafez  and  other  poets  and 
Sufis.  The  works  of  such  a  learned  man  held  in  high  esteem  by  all 
should  be  widely  read  and  circulated.  Mr.  Watt  says:  Ghazzali 
has  sometimes  been  acclaimed  in  both  east  and  west  as  the 
greatest  Muslim  thinker  after  Muhammad  and  he  is  by  no  means 
unworthy  of  that  great  dignity. 

PREFACE  OF  IMAM  GHAZZALI 

Take  whatever  the  Apostle  gave  you  and  keep  away  from 
whatever  he  forbade  you  -  59 : 7  Quran. 

'  Firstly,  I  begin  with  the  praise  of  God  though  our  praise  is 
guide  insufficient  and  meager  in  relation  to  His  real  glory. 
Secondly,  I  invoke  His  blessings  on  all  the  prophets  and  specially 
on  His  last  and  greatest  Prophet  Muhammad  (peace  be  on  them 
all).  Thirdly,  I  pray  for  His  help  and  grace  that  there  should 
remain  in  me  firm  will  and  incentive  for  writing  the  book  Ihayo 
Ulumiddin  or  the  Revival  of  religious  sciences. 

Fourthly,  O  defamer,  O  heedles,  O  one  denying  truth,  God 
has  removed  from  my  tongue  the  tie  of  silence  and  put  on  my 
neck  the  necklace  of  arguments  and  reasons.  It  is  my  duty  to 
reply  to  what  you  argue.  In  other  words,  you  have  closed  your 
eyes  from  open  truths  and  taken  help  from  whatever  is  void  and 
untrue  and  praise  ignorance.  If  a  man  wants  to  remove 
something  from  the  evil  practice  and  habits  of  men  or  expresses 
his  wish  to  translate  his  learning  into  action  in  order  that  the 
Almighty  may  prefer  to  purify  his  soul,  let  him  keep  himself 
engaged  in  divine  services  and  seek  to  atone  for  the  sins  that  he 
committed  in  his  past  life  and  for  which  he  has  become 
despaired.  Let  him  keep  aloof  from  the  society  of  those  persons 
about  whom  the  Holy  Prophet  said:  The  greatest  punishment  on 
the  Resurrection  Day  will  be  meted  out  to  that  learned  man 
whom  God  has  not  given  any  benefit  to  his  learning. 

It  is  my  firm  conviction  that  there  is  no  reason  for  your 
refusal  to  accept  the  truth  except  what  has  been  stated  below.  In 


14  REVIVAL  OF  RELIGIOUS  LEARNINGS  Vol-I 

otheT  words,  the  disease  which  entered  into  the  minds  of  the 
majority  of  people  has  also  entered  your  mind.  The  meaning.is 
that  they  have  given  up  the  rules  and  regulations  for  acquiring  ranks 
in  the  hereafter.  They  do  not  know  that  this  affair  is  very  serious  and 
grave,  tl\at  the  hereafter  is  coming  forward  and  this  world  is  reseding 
backward,  that  death  is  near  and  the  journey  is  long,  that  provision  i» 
scanty,  dangers  are  great  but  the  paths  are  blocked. 

The  learnings  and  actions  which  have  got  no  connection  with 
God  are  fit'to  be  entirely  rejected  by  the  wise  and  those  who  seek 
wisdom.  It  is  very  difficult  for  a  traveller  to  the  next  world  to 
tread  the  paths,  because  there  are  injurious  and  destructive 
elements  on  the  way  but  there  are  no  passport  and  means  to  cross 
them.  The  learned  aTe  the  guides  to  these  paths.  They  are  the 
heirs  of  the  prophets.  Time  has  slipped  out  of  their  hands.  Those 
who  are  slaves  to  evil  habits  are  alive.  The  devil  is  powerful  over 
the  majority  among  them  and  various  kinds  of  sins  misguide 
them.  Almost  every  one  among  them  is  engrossed  in  the  luxuries 
of  this  world  and  its  comforts  and  enjoyments.  For  this  reason, 
the  majority  of  them  consider  good  as  bad  and  bad  as  good.  Even 
the  religious  learnings  and  sciences  have  become  obsolete.  The 
lights  of  guidance  have  almost  disappeared  from  this  world. 
They  duped  the  people  to  believe  that  there  is  no  other  science 
than  that  of  Flah  (Jurisprudence).  These  are  the  laws  of 
administration  which  help  the  judges  in  the  administration  of 
justice  and  the  rulers  in  the  administration  of  their  countries. 
They  say  that  there  is  no  learning  except  that  of  Munazara  or 
debates.  The  present  learned  man  cherishes  hope  of  victory  over 
his  adversary  and  seeks  means  to  make  him  silent.  Or  they 
informed  the  people  that  there  is  no  learning  except  the  science  of 
scholastic  theology  by  help  of  which  a  speaker  seeks  to  influence 
the  minds  of  the  public.  They  see  no  other  science  except  these 
three  sciences.  The  sciences  of  the  next  world  and  the  learnings  of 
the  sages  of  early  times  have  disappeared  from  the  people  and 
the  learning  which  was  described  by  God  in  His  Holy  Book  as 
theology,  wisdom,  light  and  guidance  has  been  immerged  in  the 
deepest  recess  of  forgetfulness. 

When  such  is  the  condition  of  the  religion,  such  downfall  and 
catastrophe,  I  have  thought  it  prudent  to  write  this  book  entitled, 
Ihyao  Ulumiddin  (Revival  of  religions  Sciences).  By  this  book, 
the  path  of  early  Muslim  sages  has  been  opened  and  the 


Vol-I  REVIVAL  OF  RELIGIOUS  LEARNINGS  15 

impediments  that  lay  in  the  path  of  acquiring  learnings  beneficial 
to  the  prophets  and  sages  have  been  removed. 

I  have  divided  this  Ihya  into  four  books  -  1)  the  Book  of 
worship,  2)  the  Book  of  worldly  usages,  3)  the  Book  of  destructive 
evils,  4)  and  the  Book  of  constructive  virtues.  I  have  discussed  the 
chapter  of  knowledge  at  the  very  beginning  as  it  is  of  extreme 
importance.  It  is  necessary  to  discuss  such  learning  at  the  outset 
which  is  a  great  help  towards  divine  service  according  to  a  saying 
of  the  Holy  Prophet.  He  said:  To  seek  learning  is  compulsory  on 
every  Muslim.  I  began  with  the  chapter  on  knowledge  in  order  to 
separate  the  useful  knowledge  from  the  harmful  knowledge  as 
the  Prophet  said:  We  Seek  refuge  to  God  from  the  knowledge 
which  is  not  useful. 

(1)  The  Book  of  worship  comprises  ten  chapters  - 
(1)  Knowledge,  (2)  Articles  of  Faith,  (3)  Secrets  of  Purity, 
(4)  Secrets  of  Prayer,  (5)  Secrets  of  Alms-giving,  (6)  Secrets  of 
Fasting,  (7)  Secrets  of  Pilgrimage,  (8)  Rules  of  Quran-reading, 
(9)  Rules  of  invocations  and  supplications  and  (10)  observance  of 
daily  duties  according  to  fixed  times. 

(2)  The  Book  of  worldly  usages  consists  of  ten  chapters  - 
(1)  rules  of  eating  and  drinking,  (2)  rules  of  marriage,  (3)  rules  of 
earning  livelihood,  (4)  lawful  and  unlawful  things,  (5)  rules  of 
companionship  and  brotherhood  (6)  rules  of  habitation  in 
solitude,  (7)  rules  of  journey,  (8)  music  and  ecstasy,  (9)  rules  of 
enjoining  good  and  forbidding  evil,  (10)  rules  of  living  as 
exemplified  by  the  character  and  conduct  of  the  Prophet.  , 

(3)  The  Book  of  Destructive  evils  comprises  ten  chapters  - 
(1)  wonders  of  soul,  (2)  discipline  of  soul,  (3)  harms  of  stomach 
and  sexual  passion,  (4)  harms  of  tongue,  harms  of  anger,  hatred 
and  envy,  (6)  evils  of  the  world,  (7)  evils  of  wealth  and 
miserliness,  (8)  evils  of  show  and  pomp,  (9)  evils  of  self-  conceit 
and  pride  and  (10)  evils  of  vanity. 

(4)  The  Book  of  constructive  virtues  comprises  ten  chapters 
-  repentance,  (2)  patience  and  gratefulness,  (3)  fear  and  hope, 
(4)  poverty  and  asceticism,  (5)  Tauhid  (unity  of  god)  and  God- 
reliance,  (6)  love  and  contentment,  (7)  intention,  truthfulness 
and  sincerity,  (7)  self-examination  and  self-accounting,  (9) 
meditation,  (10)  death  and  ponder  over  death. 


16  REVIVAL  OF  RELIGIOUS  LEARNINGS  Vol-I 

Some  people  wrote  some  books  on  these  subjects,  but  this 
book  has  got  five  special  characteristics  which  are  not  found  in 
those  books.  Firstly,  I  have  opened  by  the  grace  of  God  what  they 
closed  up  and  I  have  written  in  detail  what  they  kept  secret. 
Secondly,  I  have  arranged  what  they  kept  scattered  and  I  have 
brought  together  what  they  kept  separate.  Thirdly,  I  have  made 
short  what  they  made  long  and  corrected  what  they  approved. 
Fourthly,  I  have  deleted  what  they  repeated.  Fifthly,  I  have  made 
this  book  easy  to  understand  after  disclosing  the  subtle  matters. 
These  are  the  five  specialities  of  this  book. 

I  have  placed  the  foundation  of  this  work  on  four  books  for 
two  reasons.  The  first  basic  reason  is  that  I  have  incorporated  in 
this  book  well-arranged  rules  and  their  real  nature,  so  that  they 
may  be  easily  understood,  as  the  knowledge  by  which  the  next 
world  is  known  is  of  two  kinds  -  knowledge  of  outward 
behaviours  and  usages  and  the  knowledge  of  revelation, 
inspiration,  secret  and  subtle  matters.  What  I  mean  by  this 
knowledge  is  the  knowledge  for  attaining  the  submum  bonum  or 
the  ultimate  object  of  life.  What  I  understand  by  the  science  of 
outward  behaviours  and  usages  is  the  knowledge  of  practical 
religion  attended  with  actions  in  accordance  with  that 
knowledge.  The  object  of  this  work  is  only  to  narrate  the  science 
of  practical  religion  and  usages  and  not  to  narrate  the  science  of 
revelation  and  inspiration,  as  there  is  no  permission  to  put  the 
latter  into  black  and  white  though  the  science  of  revelation  is  the 
ultimate  object  of  those  who  search  after  truth  and  the  most 
coveted  matter  in  the  eye  of  the  extremely  truthful,, and  the  best 
way  of  acquiring  knowledge  of  worldly  uses.  The  Holy  Prophet 
did  not  speak  anything  about  the  science  of  revelation  except 
through  signs  and  symbols,  because  he  knew  that  the  wisdom  of 
men  to  understand  it  is  very  little.  There  is  no  means  of  the 
learned  other  than  the  path  of  the  prophets,  as  the  learned  are  the 
,  heirs  of  the  prophets.  The  science  of  practical  religion  are  of  two 

.  kinds-open  science  of  the  actions  of  the  physical  senses  and  the 

secret  science  of  the  functions  of  the  heart.  The  actions  which 
keep  connection  with  the  physical  senses  are  the  actions  of  habits 
or  usages  of  life.  The  heart  which  comes  from  the  unseen  world 
,/  and  is  removed  ultimately  from  the  senses  is  influenced  by  either 

the  praiseworthy  virtues  or  the  blame-worthy  vices.  In  short,  the 
science  of  practical  religion  is  divided  into  open  and  secret 
sciences.  The  open  science  and  usages  of  life.  The  secret  science 


t 


Vol-I  REVIVAL  OF  RELIGIOUS  LEARNINGS  17 

keeps  connection  with  the  condition  of  heart  and  its  qualities  and 
is  sub-divided  into  praise-worthy  virtues  and  blame-worthy 
vices. 

The  second  basic  reason  is  this.  I  see  a  great  enthusiasm  of 
students  for  study  of  jurisprudence  or  Fiqh.  To  those  who  do  not 
fear  God,  jurisprudence  has  turned  into  an  object  of  pride  and  a 
means  for  acquiring  name  and  fame.  Jurisprudence  is  of  four 
kins.  As  the  objects  which  adorn  the  dear  things  are  also  dear,  I 
think  it  better  that  this  book  should  be  modelled  into  the  form  of 
Figh  or  jurisprudence,  so  that  the  minds  may  be  inclined  to  it.  For 
this  reason,  one  who  wants  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  minds  of 
some  men  to  the  science  of  medicine  remodels  it  after 
astronomical  tests  and  writes  a  book  after  naming  'Tablets  of 
Health'.  So  also  I  have  adopted  some  measures  in  this  work,  so 
that  the  minds  of  the  people  are  attracted  towards  such  learning 
which  is  beneficial  to  human  life.  As  the  minds  of  the  people  are 
attracted  to  the  science  of  medicine  for  preservation  of  the  health 
of  body,  so  also  it  is  necessary  that  the  minds  of  the  people  are 
attracted  to  the  treatment  of  the  diseases  of  soul  and  mind  in 
expectation  of  a  happy  and  prosperous  life  in  the  next  world 
which  will  last  forever  and  forever.  Physical  happiness  is  short 
and  transient  as  compared  to  spiritual  happiness  in  the  hereafter. 
Physique  is  mortal  while  soul  is  immortal.  So  I  pray  to  the 
Almighty  for  his  help  and  succour  for  writing  and  completing 
this  book  Ihyao  Ulumiddin  as  He  is  the  most  Compassionate,  the 
most  Merciful. 


CHAPTER  I 

ACQUISITION  OF  KNOWLEDGE 

SECTION  1  -  EXCELLENCE  OF  LEARNING 

PROOF  OF  THE  QURAN:  God  says:  God,  angels  and  those 
learned  men  who  stand  on  justice  bear  testimony  that  there  is  no 
deity  but  He  -  3  :  18.  Now  look,  O  dear  readers,  how  God  began 
attestation  first  by  Himself,  then  by  His  angels  and  then  by  the 
learned.  It  is  understood  from  this  veTse  that  the  rank  of  the 
learned  and  their  honour  are  much  high.  God  says:  Those  who 
are  believers  among  you  and  the  learned,  God  will  increase  their 
rank  -  58  :  12.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said  about  them:  The  rank  of  the 
learned  is  seven  hundred  times  more  than  that  of  the  believers, 
and  the  ofference  between  the  two  ranks  is  the  distance  of  the 
path  of  five  hundred  years.  God  says:  Are  those  who  are  learned 
equal  to  the  illiterate  -  39  :  9  ?  God  says:  The  learned  among  His 
servants  fear  God  most  -  35  :  28.  God  says:  Say,  God  is  sufficient 
as  a  witness  between  me  and  you  and  those  who  have  got 
knowledge  of  the  Quran  - 13  :  43.  God  says:  But  those  who  had 
been  granted  knowledge  said:  Alas  for  you,  the  reward  of  God  is 
best  for  those  who  believe  and  do  good  -  28 :  80. 

God  says:  These  parables  We  set  forth  for  men  and  none 
understands  them  except  the  learned  -  29  :  42.  God  says:  If  they 
had  only  referred  it  to  the  Apostle  and  to  those  charged  with 
authority  among  them,  those  of  them  who  would  investigate  it 
would  have  know  it  -  4  :  93.  God  thus  made  knowledge 
dependent  upon  their  efforts.  In  the  practical  religion,  God's 
commands  have  been  placed  upon  the  investigation  of  the 
learned  and  their  rank  with  the  prophets  for  propagation  of 
God's  commands.  God  says:  O  the  children  of  Adam!  I  have  sent 
down  to  you  raiment  to  cover  your  shame  and  adornment  to  you, 
but  the  raiment  of  piety  is  best  -  7  :  25.  God  says:  I  have  sent  to 
them  a  book  and  with  knowledge  I  explained  it  in  detail,  a  guide 
and  a  mercy  to  all  who  believe  -  7  :  52.  God  says:  I  shall  recount 
their  story  with  knowledge  -7:6.  God  says:  It  is  a  clear  sign  in  the 
hearts  of  those  to  whom  knowledge  has  reached  -  29  :  48.  God 
says:  He  created  man  and  taught  him  to  speak  -  55 ;  2. 

HADIS:  The  Holy  Prophet  said:  God  gives  knowledge  of 
religion  and  guidance  to  truth  to  one  whose  good  He  intends.  He 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  19 

said:  The  learned  are  the  heirs  of  the  prophets.  From  these,  it  is 
understood  that  there  is  no  rank  above  the  rank  of  prophethood 
and  there  is  no  honour  higher  than  its  inheritance.  He  said: 
'Whatever  is  in  heavens  and  the  earth  seeks  forgiveness  for  the 
learned/  So  the  angels  of  heaven  and  earth  remain  busy  in 
seeking  forgiveness  for  the  learned  and  they  remain  busy  with 
themselves.  What  can  be  greater  than  this  rank?  The  Prophet 
said?  "Wisdom  increases  the  honour  of  the  noble  and  exalts  a 
servant  as  high  as  to  raise  him  to  the  level  of  kings.'  From  this 
tradition,  it  is  understood  that  even  in  this  world  the  fruits  of 
learning  can  be  enjoyed.  This  is  also  true  that  the  Hereafter  is 
better  and  more  lasting  than  this  world. 

The  Holy  Prophet  said:  Two  traits  of  character  are  not  united 
in  a  hypocrite  -  good  guidance  and  knowledge  of  theology.  The 
meaning  of  theology  or  jurisprudence  will  be  discussed  soon. 
The  lowest  knowledge  of  a  jurisprudent  is  that  the  Hereafter  is 
better  than  this  world.  When  this  knowledge  will  prevail  over 
him,  he  will  be  free  from  hypocrisy  and  show.  The  Prophet  said: 
The  best  of  the  people  is  a  believing  learned  man  who  does  good 
when  sought  for,  and  when  the  people  keep  away  from  him,  he 
also  keeps  away  from  them.  He  said:  Belief  is  without  dress  and 
its  dress  is  God-fear,  its  ornament  is  shame  and  its  fruit  is 
knowledge.  He  said:  The  learned  and  the  warriors  are  nearest  to 
the  rank  of  prophethood.'  The  learned  have  been  sent  for  which 
the  prophets  were  sent.  They  are  guides  to  the  people  and  the 
warriors  wage  war  in  the  path  of  God  with  their  arms  like  the 
apostles.  He  said:  The  death  of  a  people  is  easier  than  the  death  of 
one  learned  man.  He  said:  Men  are  like  the  mines  of  gold  and 
silver.  Those  who  were  best  in  the  days  of  ignorance  are  the  best 
in  Islam  provided  they  have  got  the  knowledge  of  theology.  He 
also  said:  I  shall  intercede  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection  and  be  a 
witness  for  one  who  commits  to  memory  forty  traditions  out  of. 
my  followers  and  transmits  these  to  them. 

The  Holy  Prophet  said:  The  ink  of  the  learned  will  be 
weighed  against  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  on  the  Resurrection 
Day.  He  said:  Whoever  of  my  followers  commits  to  memory  forty 
traditions  will  meet  with  God  as  a  learned  theologian.  He  said: 
God  is  sufficient  for  the  worries  of  one  who  acquires  knowledge 
of  God's  religion.  He  gives  him  provision  from  a  source  which  he 
has  never  conceived.  He  said:  God  revealed  to  Abraham:  O 


20  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

Abraham!  I  am  All-  wise  and  I  love  every  wise  man.  He  said:  A 
learned  man  is  a  trust  of  God  on  earth.  He  said:  There  will  be  two 
groups  among  my  people.  When  both  the  groups  are  good,  the 
people  are  good  and  when  they  are  corrupt,  the  people  become 
corrupt  -  the  rulers  and  the  theologians  He  said:  Should  the  day 
come  wherein  my  knowledge  for  nearing  God  does  not  increase, 
let  not  the  sun  rise  on  that  day.  The  superiority  of  a  learned  man 
over  a  worshipper  is  like  my  superiority  over  the  ordinary  men. 
So  see  how  he  linked  knowledge  with  prophethood  and  how  he 
belittled  the  rank  of  the  learned  man  without  action,  even  though 
a  worshiper  is  worshipping  always  and  he  would  not  have 
worshipped  had  he  not  possessed  knowledge.  He  said:  The 
superiority  of  a  learned  man  over  a  worshipper  is  like  the 
superiority  of  moon  over  the  stars.  He  said:  There  will  intercede 
on  the  Resurrection  Day  the  prophets,  then  the  learned  and  then 
the  martyrs.  So  the  rank  of  the  learned  is  next  to  that  of  the 
prophets  and  higher  than  that  of  the  martyrs. 

The  Holy  Prophet  said:  God  has  not  given  any  man  more 
excellence  than  the  knowledge  of  religion  and  one  theologian  is 
more  formidable  to  the  devil  than  a  thousand  worshippers. 
Everything  has  its  foundation  and  the  foundation  of  this  religion 
is  knowledge  of  theology.  He  said:  The  best  part  of  your  religion 
is  its  easiest  and  the  best  worship  is  (the  acquisition  of)  religious 
knowledge.  He  said:  The  superiority  of  a  believing  learned  man 
over  a  believing  worhsipper  is  seventy  degrees.  He  said:  You  are 
living  in  an  age  wherein  the  theologians  are  many,  the 
Quran-readers  and  the  preaches  are  few,  the  beggars  are  few  and 
the  givers  are  many,  wherein  deeds  are  better  than  knowledge. 
But  soon  there  will  come  over  you  such  an  age  wherein  the 
theologians  will  be  few,  the  preachers  and  the  Quran-readers 
many,  the  givers  few  and  the  beggars  many,  wherein  knowledge 
will  be  better  than  deeds.  He  said:  There  is  difference  of  one 
hundred  degrees  between  a  worshipper  and  a  learned  man.  The 
distance  between  two  degrees  is  as  the  run  of  a  racing  horse  for 
seventy  years." 

The  Holy  Prophet  was  once  asked:  O  Prophet  of  God,  which 
action  is  best?  He  said:  Knowledge.  He  was  then  questioned: 
Which  knowledge  do  you  mean?  He  said:  Knowledge  about  God. 
They  said:  We  ask  you  about  action  but  you  speak  of  knowledge. 
The  Prophet  said:  With  your  knowledge  of  God,  a  few  actions 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  21 

will  suffice  and  your  ignorance  about  God  will  not  suffice  even 
though  actions  are  numerous.  He  said:  On  the  Day  of 
Resurrection,  God  will  raise  up  the  worshippers  and  the  learned 
men.  He  will  say:  O  the  congregation  of  the  learned  men,  I  have 
not  imbued  you  with  My  knowledge  but  for  My  knowledge 
about  you.  I  have  not  placed  knowledge  in  you  in  order  to  punish 
you.  Go,  I  have  forgiven  you. 

Sayings  of  the  sages:  Hazrat  Ali  said  to  Kamil:  O  Kamil, 
knowledge  is  better  than  wealth.  Knowledge  guards  you  but  you 
are  guarding  wealth.  Knowledge  dispenses  justice,  while  wealth 
seeks  justice.  Wealth  decreases  with  expense  while  knowledge 
increase  with  expense.  He  said:  A  learned  man  is  better  than  one 
who  prays  and  fights  in  the  way  of  God.  When  a  learned  man 
dies,  such  a  calamity  befalls  on  Islam  which  cannot  be  removed 
except  by  his  successor.  Hazrat  Ali  said  in  poems: 

Glory  is  due  to  none  other  than  to  the  learned. 
Guided  are  they  and  proofs  to  the  seekers  of  guidance. 
Everybody  is  honoured  proportionate  to  his  knowledge, 
But  the  illiterate  are  disgraced,  as  enemies  of  the  learned. 
,  Acquire  knowledge,  you  will  be  immortal.       • 
All  men  are  dead,  only  the  learned  are  alive. 

The  sage  Ibn  Aswad  said:  Nothing  is  more  honourable  than 
knowledge.  While  the  kings  rule  over  the  people,  the  learned  rule 
over  the  kings.  Hazrat  Ibn  Mobarak  was  asked:  Who  are  men  ?  He 
replied:  The  learned,  He  was  again  asked:  Who  are  kings?  He 
replied:  The  ascetics.  He  was  again  asked:  Who  are  the  meanest? 
He  said:  Those  who  exchange  the  religion  for  the  world.  He  did 
not  consider  anybody  as  a  man  except  the  learned,  knowledge 
distinguishes  men  from  the  lower  animals  and  it  is  only  for 
knowledge  that  men  are  honoured.  This  honour  is  not  due  to  a 
man  for  his  physical  strength,  because  a  camel  is  physically 
stronger  than  a  man.  This  honour  is  not  for  his  large  body  as  the 
body  of  an  elephant  is  bigger  then  that  of  a  man.  This  honour  is 
not  on  account  of  his  bravery  as  a  ferocious  beast  is  braver  than  a 
man.  This  honour  is  not  for  his  strength  of  too  much  eating  as  the 
stomach  of  an  oxe  is  bigger  than  that  of  a  man.  This  honour  is  not 
for  his  strength  of  sexual  passion  as  a  sparrow  has  got  more 
strength  for  coition  than  that  of  a  man.  This  honour  of  a  man  is  on 
account  of  his  knowledge  and  intellect. 


22  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

The  Holy  Prophet  said:  Whoever  has  been  given  the  Quran 
and  thinks  that  any  one  has  been  given  something  better,  he  has 
degraded  what  God  has  exalted.  Once  the  saint  Fathul  Musolli 
was  asked:  Does  not  a  sick  man  die  for  want  of  food,  drink  and 
medicine?  The  people  said:  Yes,  He  said:  Such  is  the  condition  of 
heart.  When  the  heart  is  not  given  wisdom  and  knowledge  for 
three  consequitive  days,  it  dies.  It  is  a  veritable  truth  that  the  food 
of  the  heart  is  knowledge  and  wisdom.  As  food  keeps  the  body 
alive,  these  two  things  similarly  keep  the  heart  alive.  He  who 
misses  knowledge  has  got  his  heart  diseased  and  its  end  is  its 
death,  but  he  does  not  understand  it.  When  he  leaves  the  world 
and  its  works,nis  power  of  sense  goes  away  just  as  excessive  fear 
keeps  one  forgetful  for  a  moment  of  the  pangs  of  wound.  But 
when  death  takes  away  the  burden  of  this  world  from  a  man,  he 
repents  at  the  advent  of  his  death  but  it  comes  to  no  use.  His 
condition  is  just  like  that  of  one  who  does  not  feel  any  pain  in 
swoon,  but  as  soon  as  he  recovers  from  his  swoon,  he  begins  to 
feel  pain.  Men  are  in  sleep  but  they  are  awake  at  death. 

The  sage  Hasan  Basari  said:  The  ink  of  the  learned  will  be 
weighed  against  the  blood  of  martyrs  and  then  it  will  be  found 
that  the  ink  of  the  learned  is  heavier  than  the  blood  of  the 
martyrs.  Hazrat  Ibn  Masud  said:  You  should  acquire  knowledge 
before  your  death.  By  One  in  whose  hand  there  is  my  life,  those 
who  were  killed  in  the  way  of  God  would  every  time  wish  that 
God  should  resurrect  them,  as  learned  men,  as  they  will  find  the 
honour  meted  out  to  the  learned  men  there.  Nobody  is  born 
learned.  Learning  is  to  be  acquired.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said:  To 
discuss  about  learning  in  a  portion  of  night  is  dearer  to  me  than  to 
keep  up  awake  throughout  the  night  in  prayer.  Hazrats  Abu 
Hurairah  and  Imam  Ahmad  held  this  view.  God  advised  us  to 
pray  thus:  O  God,  give  us  good  in  this  world  and  good  in  the 
hereafter  -  2  :  297.  In  explaining  'good'  in  this  verse,  Hazrat 
Hasan  Basari  said  that  it  means  Knowledge  so  far  as  this  world  is 
concerned  and  Paradise  so  far  as  the  hereafter  is  concerned.  A 
certain  wise  man  was  once  asked:  Which  thing  is  to  be  hoarded? 
He  replied:  That  thing  which  will  remain  with  you  even  if  your 
boat  capsizes,  that  is  knowledge. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  LEARNING 

'  QURAN:  God  says:  If  a  party  from  every  band  of  them 
remained  behind,  they  could  devote  themselves  to  the  religion  -  9 :1M 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  23 

.  God  says:  If  you  know  not,  then  ask  those  who  have  got 
knowledge  of  the  Book  - 16 :  43. 

HADIS:  The  Holy  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  seeks  the  path  of 
acquiring  knowledge,  God  guides  him  to  a  path  leading  to 
Paradise.  He  said:  Angels  spread  their  wings  out  of  cheer  for  the 
seeker  of  knowledge.  He  said:  To  rise  up  at  dawn  and  learn  a 
section  of  knowledge  is  better  for  you  than  to  pray  one  hundred 
rak'ats.  He  said:  If  a  man  learns  a  chapter  of  knowledge,  it  is 
better  than  the  world  and  its  contents.  He  said:  Seek  knowledge 
even  if  it  be  in  China.  He  said:  To  seek  knowledge  is  compulsory 
on  every  Muslim,  male  and  female.  He  said:  Knowledge  is  a 
treasure  house  and  its  key  is  enquiry.  So  enquire  and  there  are 
rewards  therefore  for  four  persons  -  the  enquirer,  the  learned 
man,  the  audience  and  their  lover.  He  said:  The  ignorant  should 
not  remain  silent  over  their  ignorance,  nor  the  learned  over  their 
knowledge.  He  said:  To  be  present  in  an  assembly  of  a  learned 
man  is  better  then  praying  one  thousand  rak'ats,  visiting  one 
thousand  sick  men  and  attending  one  thousand  funerals.  The 
Prophet  was  asked:  O  Messenger  of  God,  is  it  better  than  the 
reading  of  the  Quran?  He  said:  What  benefit  can  the  Quran  do 
except  through  knowledge?  He  said:  He  who  seeks  knowledge  to  . 
revive  Islam  and  dies  in  that  condition,  there  will  be  the 
difference  of  only  one  step  between  him  and  the  prophets. 

SAYINGS  OF  SAGES: 

Hazrat  ibn  Abbas  said:  When  I  sought  knowledge,  I  became 
degraded,  but  when  I  was  sought  for  knowledge,  I  became 
exalted.  Ibn  Mubarak  said:  I  wonder  for  one  who  does  not  seek 
knowledge.  How  can  he  call  himself  towards  honour?  A  certain 
wise  man  said:  I  do  not  feel  sympathy  for  anybody  more  than  two 
persons  1)  one  who  seeks  knowledge  but  does  not  understand  it 
and  2)  one  who  understands  knowledge  but  does  not  seek  it. 
Hazrat  Abu  Darda's  said:  To  learn  one  point  is  better  than  to  pray 
the  whole  night.  He  said:  Either  be  a  learned  man,  or  a  student,  or 
an  auditor,  but  not  anything  else.  Hazrat  Omar  said:  The  death  of 
one  thousand  persons  who  pray  all  the  nights  and  fast  all  the 
days  is  a  lesser  calamity  than  the  death  of  one  learned  man  who  is 
versed  in  lawful  and  unlawful  things  of  God.  Imam  Shafeyi  said: 
To  seek  knowledge  is  better  than  optional  prayers.  Hazrat  Abu 
Darda'a  said:  He  who  thinks  that  to  go  at  dawn  in  search  of 
knowledge  is  not  jihad  is  deficient  in  intellect. 


24  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

EXCELLENCE  OF  TEACHING 

QURAN:  God  says:  When  they  return  to  them,  they  warn 
their  people,  so  that  they  may  guard  themselves  -  9 :  122.  It  means 
teaching  and  guidance.  God  says:  Remember  when  God  took  a 
covenant  from  the  People  of  the  Book  -  you  shall  surely  make  it 
known  to  mankind  and  not  conceal  it  -  3  :  187.  It  shows  that 
teaching  was  binding  on  them.  God  says:  A  party  from  them 
conceal  the  truth  although  they  know  it  -  2  :  140.  This  shows  that 
concealing  truth  is  unlawful.  God  says:  Don't  conceal  evidence, 
for  whoever  conceals  it  is  wicked  at  heart  -  2  :  283.  The  Prophet 
said:  God  does  not  give  a  learned  man  any  knowledge  until  He 
takes  from  him  a  covenant  as  He  took  covenant  from  the 
propheis  -  namely  to  make  it  known  to  the  people  and  not 
conceal  it  God  says:  Who  is  better  in  speech  than  one  who  calls 
towards  God  and  does  good  -  41 :  33?  God  says:  Call  towards  the 
way  of  your  Lord  with  wisdom  and  good  sermon  - 16  :  125.  God 
says:  He  teaches  them  the  Book  and  wisdom  -  2 :  123. 

HADIS:  The  Holy  Prophet  said  to  Mu'az  when  he  was  about 
to  start  for  Yemen:  If  God  gives  guidance  to  a  man  through  your 
help,  it  is  better  than  the  world  and  its  contents.  He  said:  If  a  man 
learns  a  section  of  knowledge  to  teach  it  to  the  people,  he  will  be 
given  the  rewards  of  seventy  Siddiqs  (true  righteous  men).  Jesus 
Christ  said:  He  who  acquires  knowledge,  acts  up  to  it  and  teaches 
it  to  the  people,  will  be  called  great  in  the  kingdom  of  heavens. 
The  Prophet  said :  On  the  Day  of  Resurrection  God  will  say  to  the 
worshippers  and  the  warriors:  Enter  Paradise.  The  learned  will 
then  say:  By  virtue  of  our  learning,  you  have  worshipped  and 
fought.  God  will  then  say:  You  are  like  some  of  my  angels. 
Intercede  and  your  intercession  will  be  accepted.  So  they  will 
intercede  and  enter  Paradise.  This  rank  they  will  get  for  that 
knowledge  which  reached  others  and  not  for  the  knowledge 
which  did  not  reach  others  but  remained  with  them.  The  Prophet 
said:  God  will  not  take  away  knowledge  from  men  after  He  has 
given  it  to  them,  rather  He  will  withdraw  it  after  taking  the  lives 
of  the  learned  men.  Whenever  a  learned  man  will  pass  away,  the 
knowledge  with  him  will  also  pass  away  and  at  last  there  will  be 
none  left  except  the  ignorant  leaders.  Whenever  anything  will  be 
asked  to  them,  they  will  give  decision  without  knowledge  for 
which  they  will  be  misguided  and  will  misguide  others.  The 
Prophet  said:  If  a  man  after  acquiring  knowledge  keeps  it 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  25 

concealed  God  will  drag  him  with  the  bridle  of  fire  on  the 
Resurrection  Day. 

The  Holy  Prophet  said:  How  excellent  a  gift  and  how 
excellent  a  present  is  a  word  of  wisdom  which  you  hear  and 
remember  and  then  carry  it  and  teach  it  to  your  brother  Muslim. 
It  is  equal  to  worship  for  one  year.  He  said:  Accursed  is  the  world 
and  what  is  therein  except  one  who  remembers  the  glorious  God, 
one  who  makes  friendship  with  Him,  one  who  learns  and 
teaches.  God,  His  angels,  the  inmates  of  heaven  and  earth,  even 
the  ant  in  its  hole  and  the  fishes  in  the  sea  like  one  who  teaches 
good  to  the  people.  He  said:  A  Muslim  gives  his  brother  Muslim 
no  greater  benefit  than  a  fair  tradition  which  has  reached  him 
and  which  he  subsequently  transmits  to  him.  He  said:  If  a 
believer  hears  a  good  advice  and  then  translates  it  in  to  action,  it 
is  better  than  his  worship  for  one  year.  The  Prophet  once  came 
out  and  saw  two  assemblies  -  one  was  calling  God  and  offering 
their  supplications  and  another  giving  the  people  good 
instructions.  The  Prophet  said:  The  first  group  offer 
supplications  to  God.  If  He  wishes,  He  may  grant  them  and  if  He 
wishes  He  may  reject  them.  Another  group  are  giving  good 
instructions  to  the  people.  I  have  been  sent  as  a  teacher.  Then  he 
went  to  them  and  took  his  seat  among  them. 

The  Prophet  said:  The  simile  of  guidance  and  knowledge 
with  which  God  sent  me  is  like  that  of  profuse  rain  falling 
upon  a  certain  locality/One  spot  became  full  of  water  and 
consequently  abundant  herbs  and  grasses  grow  therein.  The 
ditches  and  the  canals  in  another  spot  reserve  water  and  God 
gives  benefit  to  mankind  therewith.  They  drink  water 
therefrom,  irrigate  their  lands  and  grow  crops.  Then  there  is  a 
spot  which  neither  hoards  water,  nor  grows  any  grass  and 
herb.  The  first  simile  is  that  of  a  man  who  gets  benefit  from  his 
knowledge.  The  second  simile  is  that  of  a  man  who  does 
benefit  io  others.  The  third  simile  is  that  of  a  man  who  is 
deprived  of  both  the  benefits.  The  Prophet  said:  One  who 
guides  towards  something  good  is  like  one  who  does  it. 

The  Holy  Prophet  said:  When  a  man  dies,  all  his  actions  stop 
except  three  -  1)  a  permanent  endowment  for  charity,  2)  useful 
knowledge  (7)  and  righteous  successors.  He  said  There  is  no  envy 
except  for  two  persons  -  1)  one  whom  God  has  given  knowledge 
according  to  which  he  conducts  himself  and  teaches  it  to  the 


26  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-1 

people.  2)  and  one  whom  God  has  given  wealth  and  power  to 
spend  it  and  he  spends  it  in  good  deeds.  He  said:  May  God's 
mercy  be  upon  my  successors.  He  was  asked:  Who  are  your 
successors?  He  said:  Those  who  love  my  ways  and  teach  them  to 
the  people. 

SAYINGS  OF  SAGES 

Hazrat  Omar  said:  He  who  learns  a  Hadis  and  induces  one  to 
act  up  to  it  will  get  the  rewards  of  one  who  translates  it  into 
action.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said:  If  a  man  teaches  good  to  the 
people,  everything  seeks  forgiveness  for  him,  even  the  fishes  of 
the  sea.  A  certain  wise  man  said:  A  learned  man  is  an 
intermediary  between  God  and  men?  So  see  how  he  acts  as  an 
intermediary.  A  learned  man  said:  The  learned  men  are  the  lights 
of  the  ages.  Each  is  a  light  in  his  own  time  giving  light  to  the 
people  of  his  time. 

Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  But  for  the  learned,  the  people 
would  have  been  animals.  In  other  words,  learning  takes  a 
man  to  the  limit  of  humanity  from  the  limit  of  animality.  The 
Prophet  said  as  reported  by  Muaz-b-Jabal:  Acquire 
knowledge,  because  its  acquisition  is  fear  of  God,  search  for  it 
is  worship,  its  study  is  praise,  search  for  it  is  jihad,  teaching  it 
to  him  who  does  not  know  is  alms-giving,  imparting  it  to  those 
who  are  worthy  is  meritorious.  It  is  the  friend  in  journey, 
companion  in  solitude,  guide  to  religion  and  light  to  them  in 
happiness  and  misfortune,  bosom  friend  to  a  stranger  and 
become  to  the  path  of  Paradise.  Through  it,  God  exalts  a 
nation,  makes  them  leaders  and  guides  of  good.  Seeing  them, 
others  also  become  guides  to  good  and  the  people  follow  them. 
The  angels  urge  them  to  work.  Everything,  dry  and  fresh, 
seeks  forgiveness  for  them,  even  the  fishes  in  sea,  insects  and 
worms,  beasts  in  forests,  cattle  and  sheep  and  even  the  stars  in 
sky  seek  forgiveness  for  them,  Knowledge  gives  life  to  a  dead 
heart,  it  is  a  light  of  eyes  in  darkness  and  gives  strength  to 
body  after  removing  weakness.  By  its  help,  a  man  reaches  the 
rank  of  the  pious.  To  think  of  it  is  like  fasting,  and  its  study  is 
like  prayer.  By  its  help,  God  is  obeyed  and  worshipped,  by  its 
help  warning  is  given,  by  its  help,  unity  of  God  is  understood, 
tie  of  blood  is  maintained  and  lawful  and  unlawful  things  are 
known. 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  27 

PROOF  OF  REASON 

The  proof  of  reason  for  the  excellence  of  knowledge  is  this.  If 
the  word  excellence  is  not  understood,  it  is  not  possible  to  know 
the  excellence  of  other  thing.  For  instance,  if  one  desires  to  know 
whether  Zaid  is  a  wise  man,  he  should  know  first  the  meaning  of 
the  word  wisdom  and  then  of  Zaid  or  else  he  will  go  astray. 
Excellence  is  the  additional  quality  of  a  thing  which  has  got  no 
defect.  It  is  said  that  a  horse  is  better  than  an  ass.  If  the  quality  of 
carrying  loads  is  taken,  both  are  the  same  but  a  horse  has  got 
some  additional  qualities  which  are  not  found  in  an  ass  -  the 
quality  of  running  fast  and  physical  beauty.  An  animal  is  sought 
for  its  quality  and  not  for  its  body.  Now  understand  why 
knowledge  is  better.  As  a  horse  is  called  better  than  an  ass  for  its 
quality  of  running  fast,  so  you  will  call  knowledge  better  if  it  is 
compared  to  other  qualities,  Knowledge  is  good  for  its  own  sake 
and  not  for  its  connection  with  other  qualities. 

All  precious  things  fall  into  one  of  three  groups  -  1)  what  is 
sought  for  its  own  intrinsic  value,  2)  what  is  sought  as  a  means  to 
an  end,  3)  and  what  is  sought  for  both.  What  is  sought  for  its  own 
instrinsic  value,  for  instance  knowledge  is  noble.  What  is  sought 
as  a  means  to  an  end  is  gold  and  silver  which  are  mere  pieces  of 
stone  having  no  value  of  their  own.  If  God  had  not  made  them 
instruments  of  purchasing  things,  their  value  would  have  been 
equal  to  other  stones.  Knowledge  is  precious  for  its  own  sake, 
because  with  its  help  the  happiness  of  the  next  world  and  Divine 
Vision  can  be  gained.  It  is  not  so  in  case  of  gold  and  silver.  What  is 
sought  for  both,  that  is  for  its  own  sake  and  as  a  means  to  an  end 
is  physical  health.  If  the  body  is  healthy,  all  things  can  be  easily 
done,  such  as  eating  and  drinking  and  other  works.  But  the  object  of 
these  things  is  to  gain  happiness  in  the  hereafter  and  nearness  to  God. 
If  this  object  is  kept  in  view,  you  will  get  pleasure  in  the  acquisition  of 
knowledge.  The  highest  rank  of  man  is  the  attainment  of  happiness  in 
the  next  world  and  the  most  excellent  things  are  the  ways  that  lead  to 
it.  So  knowledge  is  the  root  of  good  fortune  in  this  world  and  in  the 
next.  The  result  of  knowledge  is  to  enjoy  nearness  of  God,  to  keep 
company  with  the  angels  and  the  pious  divines  which  are  objects  of 
the  next  world  and  its  result  in  this  world  is  honour,  influence  over  the 
rulers  and  the  people.  So  acquisition  of  knowledge  and  its  teaching  ar 
excellent  actions  in  order  to  seek  good  of  this  world  and  good  of  the 
next  and  it  is  most  lau dable  with  the  above  object. 


28  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

The  affairs  of  this  world  do  not  become  orderly  except 
through  activities,  but  the  human  activities  are  divided  into  three 
categories.  1)  The  first  category  includes  four  fundamental 
activities  without  which  the  world  can  not  go  on  in  order,  (i) 
Agriculture  for  raising  food  stuffs  for  maintaining  lives,  weaving 
for  manufacturing  clothes,  architecture  for  building  houses  and 
government  for  regulating  human  relations  for  living  in  peace 
and  harmony.  2)  The  second  category  includes  such  activities  as 
are  helpful  to  the  above  mentioned  activities,  such  as  iron  crafts 
or  ploughs  for  cultivation,  instruments  for  spinning  and  weaving 
clothes  and  other  implements.  3)  The  third  category  includes 
such  activities  as  are  supplementary  to  the  principal  industries 
previously  mentioned,  such  as  eating,  drinking,  making  dresses, 
sewing  clothes. 

These  activities  are  necessary  for  human  habitation  just  as 
the  various  organs  of  the  body  are  necessary  for  up-keep  of  the 
human  body.  The  organs  of  the  body  also  are  divided  into  three 
categories  -  1)  The  fundamental  organs,  such  as  heart,  liver  and 
brain.  2)  What  is  helpful  to  these  principal  organs  are  stomach, 
veins,  and  back-bone  without  which  they  can  not  function.  3) 
What  is  supplementary  to  the  above  two  categories  for  perfection 
are  nails,  fingers,  eye  brows  etc.  Out  of  these  three  categories,  the 
most  noble  are  the  fundamental  things,  out  of  which  the  most 
noble  is  government  on  account  of  which  peaceful  habitation 
becomes  possible.  For  this  reason,  experienced  and  expert  men 
are  necessary  to  run  the  government. 

Administration  is  divided  into  four  classes.  (1)  The  first  class 
is  the  highest  as  it  is  the  government  of  the  prophets  and  their 
jurisdiction  spread  over  the  public  and  private  mattes  of  the 
people.  (2)  Next  is  the  administration  of  temporal  rulers  over  the 
public  matters  of  the  people  and  not  their  private  matters.  (3) 
Next  is  the  administration  of  the  learned  and  the  wise  over  the 
people  in  the  matter  of  the  religion  of  God  as  they  are  the  heirs  of 
the  prophets.  It  involves  thoughts  of  the  privileged  few.  (4)  Next 
is  the  administration  of  the  preachers  which  involves  the 
thoughts  of  the  common  men.  After  the  administration  of  the 
prophets,  the  most  noble  is  the  diffusion  of  knowledge  whereby 
the  people  are  saved  from  evil  and  destructive  habits  and  are  led 
towards  fortune  and  constructive  virtues.  This  is  the  goal  of 
knowledge  and  education. 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  29 

Intellectual  activities  are  more  excellent  than  the  other 
activities,  because  the  excellence  of  an  activity  is  known  by  three 
things  -  (1)  by  examining  the  natural  qualities  of  a  man  by  the 
help  of  which  an  activity  is  recognised.  For  instance,  acquisition 
of  knowledge  is  better  than  learning  a  language  as  knowledge 
can  be  acquired  by  intellect,  while  language  can  be  learnt 
through  the  sense  of  hearing.  As  intellect  is  better  than  the  sense 
of  hearing,  so  knowledge  is  better  than  language.  (2)  By 
examining  the  extent  of  human  usefulness,  for  instance, 
agriculture  is  superior  to  the  craft  of  a  goldsmith.  (3)  By 
observing  the  excellence  of  a  business,  for  instance,  the  business 
of  a  goldsmith  is  better  than  that  of  tanning  hides.  Knowledge 
also  has  got  the  above  three  qualities.  (1)  Firstly,  it  is  widely 
known  that  the  science  of  religion  is  the  path  of  the  hereafter. 
Perfect  knowledge  and  bright  intellect  can  acquire  it.  This  is  the 
most  noble  attribute  of  a  man,  because  owing  to  this  attribute, 
trust  of  God  has  been  accepted  by  him  and  through  it,  he  can 
enjoy  the  neighbourhood  of  God.  (2)  Secondly,  there  is  no  doubt 
that  the  people  in  general  get  benefit  of  knowledge  as  its  extant  of 
usefulness  is  very  wide  and  it  contributes  to  the  happiness  of  this 
world  and  the  hereafter.  (3)  Thirdly,  knowledge  is  a  thing  which 
heals  and  governs  the  hearts  and  souls  of  men.  Man  is  the  lord  of 
creation  and  the  lord  of  human  organs  is  his  heart.  A  spiritual 
teacher  purifies  the  heart  and  guides  it  towards  God.  So  teaching 
is  the  finest  mode  of  worship.  The  heart  of  a  learned  man  is  one  of 
the  good  stewards  of  God.  What  rank  is  therefore  higher  than 
that  in  which  a  man  is  an  intermediary  between  his  Lord  and 
fellow-men  to  draw  them  closer  to  God  and  to  paradise? 

SECTION  2 

PRAISEWORTHY  AND  BLAMEWORTHY 

BRANCHES  OF  KNOWLEDGE 
COMPULSORY  LEARNING  (FARZE  AYIN) 

The  Holy  Prophet  said:  To  seek  learning  is  compulsory  on 
every  Muslim.  He  said:  Seek  knowledge  even  though  in  China. 
There  is  difference  of  opinion  among  the  learned  as  to  which 
branch  of  knowledge  is  obligatory  on  an  individual.  There  are 
about  twenty  different  groups  in  this  matter.  The  scholastic 
theologians  any  that  it  is  scholastic  theology  because  it 
contributes  towards  understanding  of  Tauhid  and  the  attributes 
of  God.  The  Jurists  say  that  it  is  Fiqh  or  jurisprudence,  because 


30  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

with  its  help  worship,  worldly  affairs,  lawful  and  unlawful 
things  can  be  understood  and  known.  The  traditionists  say  that  it 
is  the  knowledge  about  the  Quran  and  the  ways  of  the  Holy 
Prophet.  The  Sufis  say  that  it  is  Sufism.  So  on  and  so  forth.  Abu 
Taleb  Makki  said  that  it  is  the  knowledge  about  the  five  pillars  of 
Islam. 

Knowledge  is  of  two  kinds  -  knowledge  of  practical  religion 
and  knowledge  of  spiritual  matters.  The  knowledge  which  is 
compulsory  appertains  to  practical  religion  which  deal  with 
three  matter  -  beliefs,  actions  and  prohibitions.  For  instance, 
when  a  sane  man  attains  puberty,  it  becomes  compulsory  on  him 
to  learn  the  words  of  attestatto»j "There  is  no  deity  but  God  and 
Muhammad  is  the  servant  and  apostle  of  God.  To  know  its  inner 
meaning  does  not  then  become  compulsory  on  him.  He  is  to 
believe  it  without  any  doubt  and  proof.  The  Prophet  first 
required  only  mere  verbal  acceptance  of  Islam  and  confession  of 
faith  from  the  Arabs.  What  was  compulsory  on  them  at  that  time 
was  fulfilled.  After  that,  knowledge  of  the  duties  to  do  became 
compulsory  on  them. 

These  duties  deal  with  actions  and  prohibitions.  As  regards 
actions,  if  a  Muslim  reaches  the  early  afternoon  prayer,  it 
becomes  compulsory  on  him  to  know  first  how  to  pray  it  and  to 
put  it  into  action.  This  is  the  case  with  him  in  case  of  other  prayers 
also.  If  he  lives  up  to  the  month  of  Ramazan,  it  becomes 
compulsory  on  him  to  know  the  rules  of  fasting  and  then  to  fast. 
This  is  the  case  with  Pilgrimage,  Zakat  and  other  duties  ordained 
by  God  and  binding  on  all  Muslims. 

AS  TO  PROHIBITIONS:  It  depends  upon  circumstances 
and  new  events.  It  is  not  compulsory  on  the  blind  man  to  know 
which  sight  is  unlawful,  on  the  mute  to  know  which  words  are 
unlawful.  So  to  know  a  thing  is  not  compulsory  on  a  Muslim  who 
does  not  require  it.  If  after  the  acceptance  of  Islam  there  is 
anybody  who  wears  silk  dress  or  takes  property  of  another  man 
by  force  or  looks  to  a  strange  woman  with  passion,  he  must  know 
how  to  restrain  himself  from  these  things. 

As  to  beliefs  and  thoughts  of  mind,  their  knowledge  is 
obligatory  according  to  the  state  of  mind.  Thus  if  a  man  feels  any 
doubt  in  his  mind  about  the  meaning  of  attestation  formulas,  it 
then  becomes  compulsory  on  him  to  know  what  will  remove  that 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  31 

doubt.  When  a  duty  becomes  binding  on  a  man,  to  acquire 
knowledge  about  it  becomes  binding  on  him.  As  a  man  is  not  free 
from  hatred,  envy  and  impulses  of  evil,  it  becomes  compulsory 
on  him  to  know  some  of  the  evils  as  described  in  the  Book  of 
destructive  evils.  Why  should  it  not  be  compulsory  when  the 
Prophet  said:  Three  things  are  destructive  -  sordid  miserliness, 
vehement  passion  and  self-  conceit.  Other  evils  follow  these 
three  destructive  evils.  To  remove  these  evils  from  mind  is 
compulsory.  If  a  man  is  converted  to  Islam,  what  is  compulsory 
on  him  is  to  believe  in  paradise,  hell,  resurrection  day,  judgment 
day.  The  Prophet  said:  To  acquire  learning  is  binding  on  every 
Muslim.  He  did  not  say  to  learn  Alif,  Lam  or  Mim,  but  he  said  to 
learn  the  science  of  actions.  As  actions  become  gradually 
compulsory  on  him,  to  acquire  knowledge  about  these  duties 
becomes  gradually  compulsory  on  him. 

FARZE  KEF  A  YAH 
(COMPULSORY  DUTY  ON  COMMUNITY) 

Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  learning  about  the  duties  are 
divided  into  two  categories  -  those  which  are  connected  with 
religion  and  those  which  are  not  so  connected.  The  religions 
learning  are  those  which  came  from  the  Holy  Prophets  and  in 
which  there  is  no  question  of  intellect,  and  the  learnings  that  are 
not  connected  with  the  religion  are  Mathematics,  Medicine  etc. 
They  are  of  three  kinds  -  praiseworthy,  blameworthy  and 
permissible.  The  sciences  which  are  necessary  for  progress  in  the 
world  are  praiseworthy,  such  as  Medicine,  Mathematics  etc. 
These  are  Farze  Kefayah  or  binding  on  the  community  as  a 
whole.  Farze  Kefayah  is  such  compulsory  duty  without  which  no 
nation  can  go  on  in  this  world.  If  a  man  at  least  acquires  such 
learning  or  science  in  a  town  or  locality,  all  other  people  in  the 
town  or  locality  get  absolved  from  its  sin.  If,  however  nobody 
learns  it,  all  will  be  transgressors.  The  sciences  which  should  be 
learnt  for  agriculture,  administration,  industry,  horticulture, 
weaving  etc.  are  Farze  Kefayah.  To  be  expert  in  such  learnings  is 
not  Farze  Kefayah.  The  learnings  which  are  blameworthy  are 
sorcery,  talismanic  science  juggling,  gambling  and  the  like.  The 
learnings  which  are  permissible  are  poetry,  history,  geography, 
biology  etc. 

All  learnings  connected  with  the  religion  are  praiseworthy, 
but  when  any  other  learning  is  mixed  with  any  of  them,  it 


32  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

becomes  sometimes  blameworthy.  The  praiseworthy  learnings 
comprise  sources  branches  helpful  and  supplementary 
learnings.  They  are  therefore  of  four  kinds. 

1)  Sources  of  religious  learnings  are  four  in  number  (a)  the 
Book  of  God,  the  Sunnah  or  usages  of  the  Holy  Prophet,  the 
unanimous  opinions  of  Muslim  jurists  (Ijma)  and  the  sayings  of 
companions.  Ijma  is  the  third  source  of  Islam  as  it  shows  the  path 
towards  the  usages  of  the  Prophet.  The  first  source  is  the  Quran 
and  the  second  is  the  Sunnah.  The  fourth  source  is  the  sayings  of 
the  companions  because  they  saw  the  Prophet,  witnessed  the 
coming  down  to  revelations  and  they  saw  what  others  did  not  see 
through  their  association  with  the  Prophet. 

2)  Branches  of  learnings  of  religion  are  drawn  from  the 
sources  not  according  to  the  literal  meaning  but  according  to  the 
meaning  adduced  by  the  mind,  thereby  writing  the 
understanding  as  indicated  by  the  following  Hadis:  A  judge  shall 
not  sit  in  judgment  when  angry.  This  means  that  he  shall  not  pass 
judgment  when  he  is  pressed  by  calls  of  nature,  hunger  and 
disease.  The  last  thing  is  of  two  kinds.  One  kind  relates  to  the 
activities  of  the  world,  such  as  the  books  of  law  and  is  entrusted 
to  the  lawyers  and  jurisprudent;  and  the  other  kind  relates  to  the 
activities  of  the  hereafter.  The  latter  is  the  science  of  the 
conditions  of  the  heart  and  of  its  praiseworthy  virtues  and 
blameworthy  evils. 

3)  The  third  is  the  sciences  helpful  to  the  praiseworthy 
sciences  such  as  the  science  of  language  and  grammar  which  are 
necessary  to  know  the  Quran  and  Sunnah.  They  are  not 
themselves  religious  education.  They  were  not  necessary  for  the 
Holy  Prophet  as  he  was  illiterate. 

4)  The  fourth  kind  is  the  supplementary  sciences  and  is 
connected  with  pronunciation  of  words  and  different  readings 
and  meanings,  such  as  tafsir,  knowledge  of  revocation  of  verses, 
books  on  authoritative  transmission,  biographies  of  illustrious 
companions  and  narrators  of  traditions. 

These  are  the  religious  learnings  and  are  praiseworthy  and  as 
such  Farze  Kefayah  or  binding  on  the  community  as  a  whole. 

If  you  question:  Why  have  you  included  Fiqh  or 
jurisprudence  within  the  worldly  sciences  and  Faqihs  or 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  33 

jurisprudent  as  worldly  scholars,  the  reply  is  this.  Fiqh  contains 
the  laws  of  the  administration  of  the  world  and  Faqihs  are  such 
lawyers.  There  is  of  course  no  doubt  that  a  Faqih  also  deals  with 
religion,  but  that  is  done  through  the  intermediary  of  this  world 
as  the  world  is  the  seed  ground  of  the  hereafter.  The  religion  does 
not  become  perfect  without  the  world.  If  you  leave  the  religion 
with  the  rulers,  you  will  find  that  the  religion  is  the  foundation 
and  the  ruler  is  its  guard.  That  which  has  got  no  foundation  it 
destroyed  and  that  which  has  got  no  guard  is  also  destroyed. 
Rule  can  not  go  without  a  ruler  and  the  instrument  of  rule  is  Fiqh 
or  administrative  laws.  The  government  does  not  belong 
primarily  to  the  religious  sciences.  It  is  well-known  thdt 
pilgrimage  does  not  become  perfect  unless  a  companion  is  taken 
for  protection  from  the  ruffians  and  robbers  in  journey,  but  Haj 
or  pilgrimage  is  one  thing,  rule  for  pilgrimage  is  another  thing, 
guard  is  a  third  thing  and  the  laws  are  a  fourth  thing.  The  object 
of  Fjqh  is  to  give  knowledge  of  administration.  This  is  supported 
by  the  fdllowing  Hadis:  Nobody  can  give  legal  decision  except 
three-  ruler,  authorised  agent  and  one  not  so  authorised  and  who 
gives  decision  out  of  his  own  accord.  A  ruler  or  leader  is  qualified 
to  give  legal  decisions.  One  who  is  authorised  by  him  is  his 
deputy.  Except  these  two,  the  third  person  is  called  an  intruder 
who  undertakes  the  responsibility  himself.  The  companions  in 
general  refrained  from  giving  legal  decisions,  but  when  they 
were  asked  about  the  Quran  and  the  learnings  of  the  hereafter, 
they  did  not  remain  silent. 

It  may  be  said  that  the  argument  does  not  apply  to  various 
acts  of  worship  about  which  a  Faqih  gives  decision.  In  reply,  it 
may  be  said  that  Fiqh  gives  decision  about  the  following  matters 
of  religion  -  Islam,  Prayer,  Zakat,  Halal  and  Haram.  About  Islam, 
a  Faqih  pays  attention  only  to  outward  confession  of  Kalerna 
'Tauhid  but  the  heart  or  mind  is  outside  his  domain.  The  Prophet 
kept  the  rulers  and  the  warriors  outside  it.  He  questioned  a  man 
who  praised  another  man  as  a  martyr:  Have  you  examined  the 
heart  of  the  killed?  He  uttered  Kalema  Tauhid  out  of  fear  of  being 
killed  and  then  he  was  killed»The  jurisprudent  will  give  decision 
that  his  Islam  was  good  even  though  he  uttered  it  under  the 
shadow  of  sword.  This  is  therefore  a  matter  of  this  world.  For  this 
reason,  the  Holy  Prophet  said:  I  have  been  ordered  to  fight  the 
people  until  their  lives  and  properties  are  safe  in  my  hand,  but  it 
will  come  to  no  help  in  the  hereafter.  What  will  help  him  there  is 


34  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

the  light  of  heart,  its  secret  thoughts  and  its  sincerity  which  are 
outside  the  domain  of  Fiqh. 

ABOUT  PRAYER:  A  Faqih  will  give  decision  of  correctness 
of  prayer  if  the  outside  formalities  are  observed  even  though 
one's  mind  was  absent  in  prayer  from  first  to  last.  This  kind  of 
prayer  will  be  of  no  use  in  the  hereafter.  As  verbal  expression  of 
Kalema  Shahadat  will  be  of  no  use  in  the  hereafter,  so  also  the 
outward  formalities  of  prayer  will  come  of  no  use  there.  The 
actions  of  mind  and  God-fear  which  appertain  to  the  actions  of 
the  hereafter  and  which  help  the  outward  actions  are  outside  thy 
domain  of  a  Faqih  or  jurisprudent. 

ABOUT  ZAKAT:  A  Faqih  will  see  whether  Zakat  has  been 
realised  according  to  th  prescribed  rules.  It  is  related  that  the 
judge  Abu  Usuf  gave  decision  that  if  a  man  makes  gift  of  his 
wealth  to  his  wife  at  the  end  of  a  year  and  takes  back  that  wealth 
to  him  by  gift,  it  is  alright  although  it  is  done  to  avoid  payment  of 
Zakat.  On  this  point,  Imam  Abu  Hanifa  declared  that  it  is  the 
result  of  his  knowledge  of  Fiqh  and  it  is  correct  and  the  result  of 
worldly  wisdom,  but  it  will  be  of  no  use  in  the  hereafter  and  its 
harms  in  the  hereafter  will  be  greater  that  its  benefits. 

ABOUT  HALAL  AND  HARAM:  To  abstain  from  an 
unlawful  thing  is  piety  and  there  are  four  grades  of  piety:  (1) 
Piety  which  is  required  for  attestation  of  truth.  If  a  man  gives  it 
up,  he  is  not  qualified  to  act  as  a  judge,  administrator  or  witness. 
This  kind  of  God-fear  is  only  to  save  oneself  from  all  unlawful 
things  (2)  The  second  grade  of  piety  is  that  of  a  pious  man.  He 
saves  himself  even  from  doubt  whether  a  certain  things  is  lawful 
or  unlawful.  The  Holy  Prophet  said:  Discard  that  which  is 
doubtful  for  that  which  is  not  doubtful.  He  also  said:  Sin  is 
heart-alluring  (3)  The  third  grade  of  piety  is  that  of  the 
God-fearing  man  who  gives  up  even  a  lawful  thing  for  fear  of 
falling  into  an  unlawful  thing.  The  Prophet  said:  Nobody  can  be  a 
God-fearing  man  unless  he  gives  up  what  causes  no  harm  to  him 
for  fear  of  what  causes  harm.  For  instance,  such  a  man  does  not 
state  all  affairs  to  the  people  lest  he  is  drawn  to  back-biting  or  he 
fears  to  eat  a  delicious  food  or  drink  lest  it  stimulates  passion  and 
lust  which  drive  the  people  to  commit  unlawful  things.  (4)  The 
fourth  grade  is  the  piety  of  the  siddiqs  or  extremely  religious  man 
who  gives  up  everything  except  God  for  fear  of  spending  one 
single  hour  of  life  for  nothing. 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  35 

Out  of  the  above  four  stages,  only  the  first  one  is  within  the 
domain  of  a  Faqih  and  not  the  other  three.  The  Holy  Prophet  once 
said  to  Wabisaa:  Consult  your  conscience  even  though  they  give 
you  decision  (thrice).  A  Faqih  does  not  express  opinion 
regarding  the  machinations  of  the  heart  but  confines  his  opinion 
on  things  which  are  subject  matters  of  courts.  His  jurisdiction  is 
limited  to  the  matters  of  the  world. 

Science  of  the  road  to  the  hereafter  is  divided  into  two  parts  - 
the  science  of  revelation  and  the  science  of  practical  religion.  The 
science  of  revelation  is  the  primary  object  of  the  science  of 
practical  religion.  A  certain  Sufi  said:  I  fear  the  bad  end  of  a  man 
who  has  got  no  portion  of  the  knowledge  of  revelation.  The  least 
portion  is  to  believe  it  and  place  it  to  those  who  are  worthy  of  it.  A 
certain  sage  said:  Whoever  has  got  two  characteristics-here  say 
and  pride-will  never  be  blessed  with  this  secret  science.  Anotl  er 
sage  said:  Whoever  is  addicted  to  this  world  or  persists  in  his  low 
desires  will  not  attain  this  secret  science  though  he  might  learn 
the  other  sciences.  This  secret  science  is  the  science  of  the  Siddiqs 
and  those  who  are  in  the  neighbourhood  of  God.  This  is  a  light 
which  illumines  the  heart,  cleansing  it  of  all  impurities  and 
blameworthy  sins.  He  understands  now  what  he  heard  before 
but  did  not  understand,  he  comes  to  learn  the  eternal  and  perfect 
attributes  of  God,  His  works  and  wisdom  in  the  creation  of  this 
world,  the  meanings  of  prophethood,  the  devil,  the  angels,  the 
cause  of  revelation  on  Prophets,  the  meaning  of  Paradise,  Hell, 
punishment  of  grave,  Bridge,  Balance,  accounts  and  many  other 
things.  * 

Some  say  that  these  things  are  mere  examples,  but  God  has 
reserved  for  the  pious  what  no  eye  has  seen,  no  ear  has  heard  and 
no  heart  has  conceived.  Some  say  that  man  knows  nothing  of 
Paradise  except  its  attributes  and  names.  Others  hold  that  some 
are  mere  patterns  and  some  are  identical  with  the  realities  which 
these  names  signify.  Likewise  others  hold  that  limit  to  the 
knowledge  of  God  is  one's  inability  to  reach  it.  The  object  of 
secret  knowledge  is  to  remove  the  covers  of  doubt  over  these 
things  from  mind  and  the  appearance  of  such  light  therein  which 
clears  everything  like  day  light.  It  is  possible  owing  to  the  light  of 
heart.  It  is  like  a  mirror  through  which  one  can  see  clearly 
everything  that  falls  on  it  if  is  cleared  of  all  impurities  therein. 
The  science  of  the  heart  is  that  by  which  these  impurities  are 


36  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

removed  from  the  heart  as  these  impurities  ar  impediments  or 
obstacles  ,td  the  knowledge  of  God's  attributes.  The  mode  of 
clearing  them  is  the  abstinence  from  low  desires  and  passions 
ancl  following  the  ways  of  the  prophets.  Thus  to  whatever  extent 
the  heart  is  cleansed  and  made  to  face  the  truth,  to  that  same 
extent  will  it  reflect  its  reality,  this  cannot  be  attained  without 
discipline  and  efforts.  This  secret  science  cannot  be  written  in 
books,  but  it  can  be  gained  by  experience  as  a  gift  of  God.  About 
this  science,  the  Holy. Prophet  said:  this  is  such  a  knowledge 
which  is  like  a  hidden  things.  None  can  grasp  it  except  those  who 
know  God.  Don't  despise  such  learned  man  whom  God  has  given 
a  portion  of  it,  as  God  does  not  despise  a  man  on  whom  He  gives 
*  gift. 

The  second  kind  of  practical  religion  is  the  praiseworthy  and 
blameworthy  sciences  of  the  states  of  the  heart.  Its  praise-  worthy 
qualities  are  patience,  gratitude,  fear,  hope,  contentment,  as- 
criticism,  God-fear,  generosity,  recognition  of  the  gift  of  God 
Under  all  circumstances,  good  faith,  good  conduct,  truthfulness 
and  sincerity.  To'know  the  limits  of  these  attributes,  their  real 
nature  and  the  means  whereby  they  are  attained,  their  results 
and  their  signs  are  included  in  the  Science  of  the  hereafter.  The 
blame-worthy  evils  are  the  following-fear  of  poverty, 
displeasure  over  pre-decree,  envy,  hatred,  hypocrisy,  flattery, 
hope  for  living  long,  pride,  show,  anger,  enmity,  greed, 
miserliness,  self-conceit,  to  honour  the  rich,  to  look  the  poor  with 
contempt,  haughtiness,  vanity,  boasting,  loss  of  fear  of  God, 
expression  of  piety,  lukewarm  support  for  truth,  secretly 
fostering  erurtity  with  outward  of  friendship,  revenge,  deceit, 
breach  of  trust,  harsh  treatment,  contentment  with  the  world, 
oppression,  loss  of  shame  and  kindess.  These  are  the  faults  of  the 
mind,  roots  of  evil  deeds  and  miseries. 

The  Opposing  qualities  are  praise-worthy  and  the  fountain 
heads  of  all  good  deeds.  To  know  their  real  nature  belongs  to  the 
Science  of  the  hereafter  and  to  know  it  is  compulsory  on  the  part 
of  a  learned  man  of  the  hereafter.  Whoever  turns  away  from  it 
will  be  destroyed  in  the  hands  of  the  King  of  kings  just  as 
anybodygoing  against  the  temporal  rulers  arid  the  la  ws  of  a  state 
would  be  destroyed.  The  attention  of  the  jurisprudents  with 
respect  to  the  compulsory  sciences  is  towards  the  world  and  the 
attention  of  these  people  is  towards  the  good  of  the  hereafter.  If 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  37 

any  Faqih  is  asked  about  sincerity,  God-reliance  etc.,  he  would 
make  delay  in  reply,  but  as  soon  as  he  is  asked  about  divorce  arid 
other  matters,  he  will  at  once  reply  and  deal  with'  subtle 
intricacies. 

Among  the  learned  men  of  practical  sciences,  those  who  are 
God  fearing  keep  attached  to  the  learned  men  of  secret  sciences. 
As  a  student  sits  in  school,  so  Imam  Shafeyi  used  to  sty  near 
Shaiban  Ray  and  ask  him:  How  shall  I  do  this  work?  The  people 
asked  Imam  Shafeyi:  Are  you  asking  questions  to  a  Beduin?  He 
said:  T^is  man  has  learnt  what  we  have  not  learnt.  Imarn 
Ahmad-b-Hambal  and  Ihya-  b-Mayen  could  not  agree  on  a 
certajn  matter  and  they  therefore  went  to  Maruf  Karkhi  who  was 
not  equal  to  them  in  the  science  of  practical  religion.  They  said,  to 
him:  The  Prophet  said:  What  will  you  do  when  yqu  will  not  find  a 
matter  in  the  Quran  and  Sunnah?  He  said:  Ask  the  pious  men 
among  you  and  consult  them  in  this  matter .  We  have  come  to  you 
for  this. 

Someone  saidi  The  learned  men  of  exoteric  knowledge  are 
the  ornaments  of  the  world  and  the  state  but  the  learned  men  of 
exoteric  knowledge  are  the  ornaments  of  the  kingdom  and 
angles.  Hazrat  Jun'ajd  said:  My  spiritual  guide  said  tq  me  once: 
With  whpm  do  you  keep  company  when  you  leave  my  house?  I 
said:  I  keep  company  with  Mohabasi.  He  said:  Yes,  fojjow  his 
knowledge  and  manner  but  avoid  the  subtleties  of  hj$  scholastic 
theology  and  return  it  to  him.  When  I  left  him,  I  heard  him  say: 
May  God  make  yqu  first  a  Muhaddis  (traditionist)  and  then  an 
ascetic  (Sufi),  but  not  nrst  an  ascetic  and  then  a  traditionist.  Its 
meaning  is  that  he  should  acquire  first  the  science  of  tradition 
and  learning  and  then  become  an  ascetic  and  he  will  fhen  get 
salvation,  but  he  who  becomes  an  ascetic  before  acquisition  of 
knowledge  throws  himself  into  faults. 

As  to  Philosophy,  it  is  not  a  single  branch  of  science  but 
comprises  four  subjects.  The  first  subject  includes  Geometry  and 
Arithmetic,  both  of  which  are  permissible  for  those  who  are  firm 
in  faith.  The  second  subject  is  Logic  which  is  a  science  of  reason, 
and  it  states  proof,  reason  and  cause.  Both  these  are  included 
within  theology.  The  third  subject  is  the  science  of  Sufism  or  the 
science  of  His  being  and  attritutes  of  God.  This  is  also  included 
within  theology.  The  fourth  subject  is  Physics  of  which  some 


38  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

portions  contradict  Shariat  and  true  religion  and  are  therefore 
not  right. 

I  shall  describe  the  character  and  conduct  of  the  early  Faqihs. 
They  had  no  other  object  except  to  gain  the  pleasure  of  Lord  and 
the  signs  of  the  learned  men  of  the  hereafter  were  known  to  them 
from  their  conditions.  They  lived  not  only  for  the  silence  of  Fiqh, 
but  also  for  the  science  of  heart,  The  companions  did  not  publish 
books  on  Fiqh  or  read  them.  So  also  the  Imams  did  not  compile 
books,  yet  they  were  experts  in  the  science  of  Fiqh.  Soon  we  shall 
narrate  the  lives  of  some  noted  Faqihs  not,  to  attack  them  but  to 
attack  those  who  claim  to  be  their  followers  act  and  contrary  to 
their  character  and  conduct.  The  noted"  Faqihs  are  five:-  Imam 
Abu  Hanifa,  Imam  Malek,  Imam  Shafeyi,  Iman  Ahmad-b- 
Hambal  and  Imam  Sufiyan  Saori.  Everyone  of  them  was  an 
ascetic,  devout,  learned  in  the  science  of  the  hereafter,  law  given 
for  the  people,  seeker  of  God's  pleasure  through  the  help  of  Fiqh. 
Everyone  of  them  possessed  five  qualities,  but  the  modern 
Faqihs  accepted  only  one  of  these  qualities.  That  is  research  in  to 
the  minutest  details  of  Fiqh.  The  four  other  qualities  relate  to  the 
good  of  the  hereafter  and  only  one  relates  to  the  good  of  this 
world.  They  are  followed  only  in  respect  of  one  quality  and  not 
the  other  four. 

IMAM  ABU  HANIFA 

He  was  a  great  Imam  and  a  great  ascetic  and  God  fearing 
man.  He  sought  God's  pleasure  by  his  knowledge  Ibn  Mobarak 
said  that  Imam  Abu  Hanifa  had  good  character  and  conduct  and 
observed  prayer  and  fast  too  much.  Hammad-b-Solaiman  said 
that  he  was  in  the  habit  of  praying  the  whole  night  and  in  another 
narration  half  the  night.  Once  Abu  Hanifa  was  walking  in  a  street 
when  the  people  hinted  at  him  saying:  This  man  spends  the' 
whole  night  in  prayer.  He  said:  I  am  ashamed  before  God  that  I 
am  described  by  something  which  I  don't  possess.  Regarding  his 
asceticism,  Rabiy-b-Asem  said:  Caliph  Yezid  sent  me  once  to 
Abu  Hanifa  and  he  wanted  to  appoint  him  as  cashier  of  the  state 
treasury.  On  his  refusal  to  accept  the  post,  he  was  given  twenty 
stripes.  Now  see  how  he  fled  away  from  a  prize  post  and  as  a 
result  he  received  punishment.  Hakim-b-Hashim  said:  I  heard 
about  Abu  Hanifa  at  Syria  that  he  was  the  most  trusted  man  for 
which  the  Caliph  wanted  him  to  be  appointed  as  a  Treasurer  of 
the  state  treasury  and  threatened  him  with  punishment  if  he 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  39 

would  not  accept  it.  He  preferred  king's  punishment  to  that  of 
God. 

Ibnul  Mobarak  narrated  about  Abu  Hanifa:  Do  you  say  of 
that  man  who  was  given  the  treasures  cf  the  world  but  who  fled 
away  from  them.?  Muhammad-b-Shuja  narrated:  Caliph  Abul 
Mansur  ordered  XjO,000  dirhams  to  be  given  to  the  Imam  but  he 
declined  the  offer.  On  the  day  when  the  wealth  would  be 
delivered  to  him,  he  covered  his  body  with  a  cloth  after  prayer 
and  did  not  talk  with  anybody.  The  man  of  the  Caliph  went  to 
him  with  Dirhams  but  the  Imam  did  not  talk  with  him.  One  of  the 
people  present  said:  This  is  his  habit.  Put  it  in  a  corner  of  his 
room.  This  was  done.  Thereafter  Abu  Hanifa  left  death 
instruction  with  regard  to  this  wealth  and  said  to  his  son:  When  I 
die  and  you  finish  my  burial,  take  this  purse  to  the  Caliph  and  tell 
him:  This  is  your  trust  which  you  have  deposited  with  Abu 
Hanifa,  His  son  said:  I  did  accordingly.  The  Caliph  said:  May 
God  have  mercy  on  your  father. 

It  is  narrated  that  he  was  once  offered  the  post  of  the  chief 
justice  of  the  state,  but  he  said:  I  am  not  fit  for  this  post.  When  he 
was  asked  about  the  reason,  he  said:  If  I  have  told  the  truth,  it  is 
good  for  the  post,  and  if  I  have  told  a  lie,  I  am  unfit  for  that  post  as 
I  am  a  liar. 

Abu  Hanifa's  knowledge  of  the  things  of  the  hereafter  and 
his  concern  over  the  important  matters  of  religion  are  proved  by 
the  following  narration.  Ibn  Juray  said:  I  was  informed  that  Abu 
Hanifa  was  a  great  God  fearing  man.  Sharik  said:  Abu  Hanifa 
used  to  spend  long  time  in  silence  and  meditation  and  converse 
little  with  the  people.  These  actions  prove  his  exoteric 
knowledge.  He  who  has  been  given  silence  and  asceticism  has 
been  given  all  knowledge. 

IMAM  SHAFEYI 

He  was  a  devout  worshipper.  He  divided  the  night  into  three 
parts-one  part  for  study,  one  part  for  prayer  and  one  part  for 
sleep.  The  narrator  said  that  Imam  Shafeyi  used  to  finish  the 
Quran  60  times  in  the  month  of  Ramzan  and  every  time  he 
finished  it  in  prayer.  Hasan  Qarabasi  reported:  I  spent  many 
nights  with  the  great  Imam.  He  used  to  spend  one  third  of  the 
night  in  prayer  and  yet  I  have  not  seen  him  reciting  more  than 
fifty  to  one  hundred  verses.  At  the  end  of  each  verse,  he  would 


40  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

beseech  God's  mercy  upon  himself  and  upon  all  Muslims.  The 
Imam  said:  I  used  not  to  take  food  with  satisfaction  for  the  last  16 
years  as  a  full  stomach  makes  the  body  heavy,  makes  the  heart 
hard,  increases  sleep  and  renders  a  man  lazy  for  worship.  He  also 
said:  Never  have  I  taken  oath  by  God  whether  true  or  false.  He 
said:  He  who  claims  that  the  love  of  the  world  and  love  of  God  are 
united  in  him  is  a  liar.  Hudaidi  said:  Imam  Shafeyi  once  went  to 
yemen  with  some  men  and  returned  to  Mecca  with  10,000 
dirhams.  A  tent  was  fixed  for  him  in  the  outskirts  of  Mecca  and 
people  began  to  come  to  him  He  did  not  move  from  that  place  till 
he  distributed  all  dirhams  among  the  people. 

Generosity  of  the  Imam  was  great  and  the  root  of  asceticism 
is  generosity.  Whoever  loves  a  thing  keeps  it  with  him  and 
everything  is  insignificant  to  one  to  whom  the  world  is 
insignificant.  This  is  asceticism  which  leads  to  God-fear.  Once 
Sufiyan-b-Aynabat  fell  in  swoon  before  the  Imam.  He  was  told 
that  he  had  expired.  He  said:  If  he  has  died,  the  best  man  of  his 
time  has  died.  Omar-b-Nabatah  said:  I  have  not  found  more 
God-fearing  man  than  Imam  Shafeyi.  I,  he  and  Hares-b-Labeed 
went  one  day  to  the  valley  of  Safa.  Hares  had  a  student  with  him 
and  he  was  a  Qari  or  reader  of  the  Quran.  He  had  a  sweet  voice 
and  began  to  read:  This  is  a  day  on  which  they  will  not  speak  and 
they  will  not  be  given  permission  to  rise  excuse-77:35, 1  saw  that 
the  colour  of  the  face  of  the  Imam  became  changed  and  he  was 
trembling  vehemently  and  then  fell  in  swoon.  When  he 
recovered  he  began  to  say:  O  God,  I  seek  refuge  to  Thee  from  the 
place  of  the  liars  and  the  scoffing  of  the  heedless.  O  God,  the 
hearts  of  gnostics  have  submitted  and  the  necks  of  those  who 
yearn  for  Thee  bowed.  O  worshipped,  bestow  Thy  bounty  upon 
me  and  cover  me  with  Thy  mercy.  Forgive  my  faults  through  the 
grace  of  Thy  countenance.  Then  he  along  with  us  left  the  place. 
When  I  reached  Baghdad,  he  was  then  in  Iraq.  I  was  making 
ablution  in  the  bank  of  the  river  for  prayer.  A  man  then  was 
passing  by  me  and  said:  O  young  man,  make  ablution  well,  God 
will  then  treat  good  with  you  both  in  this  world  and  in  the  next.  I 
followed  him.  He  looked  at  me  and  said:  Have  you  got  any 
necessity?  I  said:  Teach  me  something  of  what  God  has  taught 
you.  He  said:  Know  that  he  who  knows  God  as  true  gets  salvation 
and  he  who  fears  his  religion,  remains  safe  from  destruction.  He 
who  remains  indifferent  from  the  world,  will  be  cool  at  seeing 
the  rewards  which  God  will  give  him  tomorrow.  Shall  I  give  you 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  41 

more  advice?  I  said:  Yes  He  said:  The  faith  of  one  who  has  got 
three  characteristics  is  perfect-(l)  to  enjoin  good  to  act  according 
to  it,  and  (2)  to  prohibit  evil  and  to  desist  from  it,  (3)  and  to  guard 
the  limits  of  God.  Shall  I  give  you  more  advice?  I  said:  Yes.  He 
said:  Adopt  asceticism  in  the  world,  entertain  hopes  for  the  next 
world  and  believe  God  in  all  your  affairs,  you  will  then  be  among 
those  who  will  get  salvation.  Then  he  went  away.  I  asked:  Who  is 
he?  They  said:  Imam  Shafeyi.  Such  fear  and  asceticism  are  the 
result  of  nothing  but  for  his  knowledge  of  God  and  not  for  his 
knowledge  of  legal  questions  like  advance  payment,  loan,  wages 
etc.  as  are  embodied  in  Fiqh. 

Imam  Shafeyi  said:  The  knowledge  of  one  who  does  not 
make  himself  perfect  will  come  of  no  use  to  him.  He  also  said: 
Whose  confesses  his  obedience  to  God  through  the  help  of  his 
knowledge,  his  heart  becomes  illumined.  He  also  said:  Every  one 
has  got  some  persons  who  love  him  and  some  who  hate  him.  If  it 
be  so,  be  among  those  who  obey  God. 

Abdul  Qader-b- Abdul  Aziz  was  a  God-fearing  man.  He  once 
asked  Imam  Shafeyi:  Which  of  these  virtues  is  better-patience, 
trial  and  peace  and  mind  (Tamkin)?  The  Imam  replied:  Peace  of 
mind  is  the  rank  of  the  Prophets  and  it  is  not  attained  except  by 
trial,  and  patience  comes  after  trial.  Don't  you  see  that  God 
examined  Abraham  and  then  He  gave  him  peace  of  mind?  he 
examined  Solomon  and  then  gave  him  peace  of  mind  and 
kingdom.  He  did  the  same  with  Moses,  Job,  Joseph  and  others. 
This  reveals  the  deep  knowledge  of  Imam  Shaheyi  about  the 
Quran.  Sufyan  Saori  said:  I  or  anybody  has  not  seen  like  Shafeyi. 

IMAM  MALEK 

He  was  adored  with  five  qualities.  Once  he  was  asked:  O 
Malik,  what  do  you  say  about  search  for  knowledge?  He  replied: 
It  is  fair  and  beautiful.  If  anybody  does  not  separate  from  you 
morning  to  evening,  don't  be  separate  from  him.  When  the  Imam 
intended  to  narrate  traditions,  he  used  to  make  ablution,  sit  in  the 
middle  of  his  bed,  comb  his  beard,  apply  scent  and  then  become 
fearful  and  grave  and  then  narrate  traditions.  When  asked  about 
these  formalities,  he  said:  I  intend  to  show  honour  to  the 
traditions  of  the  Prophet.  He  said:  Knowledge  is  light.  God  places 
it  wherever  He  wishes.  Regarding  the  seeking  of  pleasure  of  God 
by  knowledge,  he  said:  There  is  no  benefit  in  arguments  about 


42  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

religion.  This  is  proved  by  a  saying  of  Imam  Shafeyi  who  said: 
Once  I  was  near  Malek.  He  was  asked  about  forty  eight  legal 
questions:  He  replied  regarding  thirty  two  questions:  I  don't 
know.  When  the  learned  were  mentioned,  Imam  Malek  was 
counted  as  a  bright  star.  It  is  said  that  once  the  Caliph  Mansur 
prohibited  him  to  narrate  the  particular  tradition  on  the  illegality 
of  divorce  made  under  compulsion.  The  Caliph  thereafter 
instigated  some  one  to  question  the  Imam  on  the  subject.  He 
declared  among  the  people  that  divorce  pronounced  under 
compulsion  is  notbinding.  For  this,  the  Caliph  had  him  flogged. 

The  Caliph  Harun  Rashid  once  asked  Imam  Malek:  Have  you 
got  any  house?  He  said:  No.  The  Caliph  then  gave  him  3000 
dinars  and  said:  Go  and  buy  with  this  money  a  house.  The  Imam 
accepted  the  money  but  did  not  spend  it  for  the  purpose.  When 
the  Caliph  intended  to  return  to  Baghdad  he  asked  Malek:  You 
should  come  along  with  us,  because  we  have  decided  to  make  the 
people  follow  'Mualta'  as  Osman  made  them  follow  the  Quran. 
Malek  said:  This  is  not  the  way  to  make  the  people  follow 
'Mualta'  because  the  companions  of  the  Prophet  after  his  death 
dispersed  around  the  different  countries  and  they  related  the 
traditions  in  each  place.  Further  the  Prophet  said:  Difference  of 
opinion  among  the  people  is  a  blessing.  As  for  my  going  with 
you,  there  is  no  way  as  the  Prophet  said:  Had  they  known,  they 
would  Tiave  known  that  Medina  is  best  for  them  again  he  said: 
Medina  removes  its  corruption  just  as  the  furnace  removes  the 
dross  of  iron.  Therefore  here  are  your  dinars.  If  you  like,  take 
them  back  and  if  you  like,  you  may  leave  them.  Does  this  mean 
that  you  ask  me  to  leave  Medina  in  return  for  what  you  have 
given  me?  I  prefer  nothing  more  than  the  city  of  the  Messenger  of 
God,  not  even  the  whole  world. 

Such  was  the  asceticism  of  Malek.  When  as  a  result  of  his 
diffusion  of  knowledge  and  the  spreading  of  his  companions, 
large  wealth  began  to  come  to  him  from  different  corners  of  the 
earth,  he  used  to  distribute  them  in  charity.  Such  an  ascetic  was 
Soloman  despite  his  royal  glory.  Another  example  of  his 
asceticism  is  that  Imam  Shafeyi  once  said:  I  noticed  a  number  of 
Khorasani  horses  at  the  door  of  Malek.  I  have  never  seen  any 
other  horse  better  than  them.  I  said  to  Malek:  How  beautiful  are 
they!  He  said:  They  are  then  presents  from  me  to  you.  I  said  to 
him:  Keep  one  of  them  for  yourself  for  riding.  He  said:  I  shall  be 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  43 

ashamed  before  God  to  tread  with  the  hoof  of  any  least  of  burden 
the  soil  wherein  lies  His  Prophet.  See  therefore  his  benevolence 
and  his  veneration  for  the  soil  of  Medinah. 

There  is  yet  another  report  of  his  asceticism.  He  said:  I  once 
went  to  the  Caliph  Harun  Rashid.  he  asked  Malek:  O  Abu 
Abdullah,  you  should  come  frequently  to  my  place,  so  that  I  may 
learn  from  you  'Muatta'.  He  said:  May  God  exalt  my  master.  This 
knowledge  has  come  from  you.  If  you  honour  it,  it  will  be 
exalted;  and  if  you  dishonour  it,  it  will  be  despised.  Knowledge  is 
.something  you  shall  learn  and  not  something  you  should  receive. 

Then  the  Caliph  said:  You  are  right.  He  said  to  his  sons:  Go 
out  to  the  mosque  and  acquire  from  him  knowledge  along  with 
the  people. 

Imam  Ahmad  and  Sufiyan  Saori  had  many  followers. 
Nevertheless  they  are  known  for  asceticism  and  God  fear.  All 
books  contain  their  sayings  and  stories  of  their  asceticism. 

Now  examine  the  lives  of  the  Imams  and  serutinize  those 
who  claim  to  be  their  followers.  Did  the  Imams  rise  to  such 
eminence  only  for  their  knowledge  of  Fiqh  which  now  means 
contracts  of  the  type  of  salam,  hire,  rental,  lease  and  other 
worldly  laws? 

SECTION  3 

BLAMEWORTHY  SCIENCES 

Knowledge  is  not  held  to  be  blameworthy  except  for  one  of 
three  reasons.  Firstly,  if  it  leads  to  the  harm  of  another,  it  becomes 
blameworthy,  such  as  magic,  talisman,  sorcery".  These  sciences 
are  true  no  doubt  as  the  Quran  testifies.  The  Sahihs  Bukhari  and 
Muslim  narrate  traditions  also  that  the  Prophet  of  God  was  once 
victim  of  sorcery  for  which  he  fell  ill.  Gebriel  informed  the 
Prophet  of  this  matter.  The  enchantment  was  taken  out  from 
underneath  a  stone  in  the  bottom  of  a  well.  It  is  a  kind  of 
knowledge  obtained  through  the  learned  men  of  the  precious 
stones  and  mathematical  calculations  of  the  places  and  times  of 
the  rising  of  stars. 

(2)  The  second  reason  is  that  if  a  science  causes  much  harm  to 
the  acquner,  it  is  blameworthy,  such  as  the  science  of  Astronomy. 
It  is  of  two  kinds,  once  coals  with  Mathematics  and  is  connected 


44  THE  0OQK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

with  accounts.  The  Quran  says:  The  sun  and  the  moon  have  got 
courses  reckoned-55:  4  It  says  again:  As  for  the  moon/ 1  decreed 
stations  for  it  till  it  changes  like  an  old  and  crooked  palm 
branch-36:39.  The  second  kind  deals  with  Astrology,  the  gist  of 
which  is  that  the  future  events  are  indicated  by  the  present 
causes.  Astrology  is  therefor  an  attempt  to  know  the  course  of  the 
laws  and  ordinances  of  God  in  connection  with  His  creations.  ■ 
The  Sharia  has  declared  it  as  blameworthy.  The  Prophet  said: 
Whenever  Taqdir  is  mentioned,  remain  silent  and  whenever  my 
companions  are  mentioned,  remain  silent.  The  Prophet  said:  I 
fear  three  things  for  my  followers  after  me,  the  oppression  of  the 
leaders,  faith  in  Astrology  and  disbelief  in  Taqdir  (predecree). 
Hazrat  Omar  said:  Learn  Astrology,  to  conduct  you  in  land  and 
sea  and  not  more.  There  are  three  causes  for  this  prohibition. 
Firstly,  it  is  harmful  for  majority  of  the  people,  because  thoughts 
occur  in  their  minds  that  it  is  the  stars  which  influence  the  course 
pi  events  and  so  the  stars  are  Jo  be  worshipped.  The  wise  man 
knows  that  the  sun,  the  moon  and  the  stars  are  subjects  to  the 
commands  of  God.  The  second  reason  is  that  Astrology  is  purely 
guess  work.  It  has  been  termed  blameworthy  because  it 
command  is  that  of  only  ignorance.  Once  the  Prophet  was 
passing  by  a  man  surrounded  by  the  people.  He  asked:  Who  is 
this  man?  They  said:  He  is  a  great  learned  man.  The  Prophet 
asked:  Of  what  learning?  They  said:  Of  poetry  and  Arab 
geneology.  The  Prophet  said:  Such  a  learning  which  does  not  do 
any  benefit  and  such  ignorance  which  does  not  do  any  harm.  The 
Prophet  said:  Learning  is  of  decisive  verses  or  lasting  usages  (of 
Prophet)  and  just  ordinances  (based  on  the  Quran  and  Sunnah). 
It  appears  from  this  that  discussion  about  Astrology  and  the  like 
sciences  are  useless  undertakings. 

(3)  The  third  reason  that  this  science  is  blameworthy  is  that  it 
becomes  of  no  use  to  one  who  acquires  it,  for  example,  learning  of 
trivial  sciences  before  the  important  ones  learning  of  subtleties 
before  fundamentals,  Ignorance,  however,  in  some  cases  is 
beneficial  as  is  seen  from  the  following  story. 

A  certain  person  once  complained  to  a  physician  that  his  wife 
was  sterile  and  that  she  bore  no  children.  The  physician  left  the 
pulse  of  the  woman  and  told  her  that  she  would  die  after  40  days. 
The  woman  got  extremely  frightened  and  gave  away  all  her 
wealth  and  lived  these  forty  days  without  food  and  drink.  After 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  45 

the  period,  her  husband  came  to  the  physician  and  said  that  his 
wife  did  not  die.  The  physician  said:  Now  cobabit  with  her  arid 
you  will  get  an  issue.  He  asked:  How  will  it  be?  The  physician 
said:  I  saw  that  the  woman  was  too  fat  and  that  grease  was 
blocking  her  uterus  and  that  it  could  not  be  removed  except  by 
fear  of  death.  Then  she  became  lean  and  fit  for  conception.  It  is 
gathered  from  this  story  that  ignorance  is  sometimes  good. 
Ignorance  of  some  branches  of  knowledge  is  good  and  it  will  be 
clear  from  the  following  Hadis  of  the  Holy  Prophet.  He  said:  I 
seek  refuge  to  God  from  useless  knowledge. 

So  don't  discuss  about  those  learning  which  have  been 
declared  by  Shariat  as  useless.  There  are  many  things  which,  if 
inquired  into,  will  do  harm. 

SECOND  MATTER 

CHANGE  OF  THE  MEANINGS  OF  SOME  WORDS 
CONNECTED  WITH  KNOWLEDGE. 

The  people  have  changed  the  original  meanings  of  the  words 
Fiqh,  Ilm,  Tauhid,  Tazkir  and  Hekmat  and  have  given  them  the 
meanings  of  their  own.  As  a  result,  they  have  become  now 
blameworthy. 

FIQH  (religious  learning).  It  has  now  the  meaning  of  the 
science  of  unusual  legal  cases,  mystery  of  the  minutest  details  of 
jurisprudence  and  excessive  debates  on  them.  The  man  who 
gives  attention  to  such  a  science  is  called  now  Faqih  or 
jurisprudent.  In  the  first  century,  it  had  a  different  meaning.  It 
was  a  science  of  the  path  of  the  hereafter  and  knowledge  of  the 
beneficial  and  harmful  matters  of  soul,  knowledge  of  the 
meanings  of  the  Quran  and. the  domination  of  God  fear  over  the 
heart.  This  is  proved  by  the  words  of  God  in  the  following  verse 
that  they  may  be  expert  in  religion  and  may  warn  their  people 
when  they  come  back  to  them-9:193.  Fiqh  or  jurisprudence  is  that 
which  gives  such  a  warning  and  fear  rather  than  the  details  of 
divorce,  manumission,  rental  etc.  God  says:  They  have  got  hearts 
but  they  do  not  understand  therewith-2:178.  Those  who  were 
present  before  the  Prophet  did  not  know  the  details  of  laws. 

Someone  asked  Sa'ad-b-Ibrahim:  Who  is  the  greatest  Faqih  in 
Medina?  He  said:  He  who  fears  God  most.  This  points  out  to  the 
result  of  Fiqh.  The  Prophet  once  said:  Shall  I  not  inform  you 


46  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

about  a  perfect  Faqih?  The  companions  said:  Yes.  He  said:  a 
perfect  Faqih  is  one  who  does  not  deprive  the  people  of  the  mercy 
of  God,  does  not  give  hope  of  freedom  from  punishment,  nor 
makes  them  lose  hope  of  His  mercy,  nor  discards  the  Quran  in 
favour  of  something  else.  When  Anas-b-Malek  narrated  the 
following  tradition-To  sit  with  those  who  remember  God  from 
dawn  to  sun-  rise  is  dearer  to  me  than  the  manumission  of  four 
slaves',  the  Prophet  said:  A  man  cannot  become  a  perfect  Faqih 
unless  he  makes  the  people  understand  about  the  existence  of 
God  and  believes  that  there  are  several  objects  in  the  Quran. 
Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  A  Faqih  is  one  who  renunciates  the 
world,  remains  steadfast  to  the  hereafter,  is  wise  in  his  religion 
worships  his  Lord  constantly,  restrains  himself  from  attacks  on 
the  reputation  of  his  fellow  Muslims,  is  indifferent  to  their 
wealth  and  wishes  good  of  the  Muslim  world.  He  did  not  say. 
One  who  commits  to  memory  the  intricacies  of  law  is  Faqih. 

ILM  is  the  science  of  religion,  the  science  of  the  knowledge  of 
God  and  His  verses.  When  the  Caliph  Omar  died,  Hazrat  Ibn 
Masud  exclaimed:  Nine-tenths  of  the  science  of  religion  have 
passed  away.  The  present  people  used  the  term  Ilm  to  mean  the 
•science  of  those  who  can  well  debate  the  cases  of  jurisprudence 
with  their  adversaries  and  those  who  cannot  do  that  are  termed 
weak  and  outside  the  category  of  the  learned  men.  But  what  has 
been  said  about  the  excellence  of  learning  and  the  merits  of  the 
learned  men  apply  to  those  who  are  versed  according  to  the 
former  meaning. 

TAUHID  (unity  of  God).  The  present  meaning  of  Tauhid  is 
scholastic  theology  or  Ilm  Kalam,  the  knowledge  of  the 
methods  of  argumentation,  the  manner  of  confronting 
adversaries.  Tauhid  was  then  the  belief  that  all  things  come 
from  God  and  it  ruled  out  all  intermediary  causes,  the  belief 
that  good  and  evil  all  come  from  God  and  that  the  result  of 
Tauihid  is  God-reliance.  Such  people  believed  that  another 
fruit  of  Tauhid  is  to  avoid  complaints  to  the  people,  not  to  get 
angry  at  them  and  to  remain  satisfied  with  the  decree  of  God. 
Another  fruit  of  Tauhid  is  the  saying  of  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  in  his 
illness.  The  people  said  to  him:  Let  us  call  a  physician  for  you. 
He  said:  The  Physician  Himself  has  given  me  this  disease.  In 
another  narration,  he  said:  The  Physician  said:  I  certainly  do 
what  I  wish-II:109, 85:16Q. 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  47 

Tauhid  is  therefore  a  precious  fruit  which  is  engaged  into 
several  husks,  the  outer  husk  is  distant  from  the  inner.  The 
modern  people  have  taken  up  the  husk  and  given  up  the  pith. 
The  people  have  termed  it  as  the  science  of  husk  and  given  up  the 
science  of  pith.  The  meaning  of  the  husk  of  Tauhid  is  to  utter  by 
tongue  There  is  no  deity  but  God'.  It  is  opposite  to  Trinity  of  the 
Christians.  The  hypocrite  Muslims  also  utter  it.  The  pith  of 
Tauhid  is  confirmation  by  heart  what  the  tongue  confesses.  The 
heart  believes  it  to  be  true.  This  is  real  Tauhid  which  is  to  entrust 
every  affairs  of  man  to  God  in  such  a  way  that  his  attention  is  not 
diverted  to  any  other  matter  except  to  God.  Those  who  follow 
their  passion  do  not  conform  to  this  monotheism. 

God  says:  Have  you  seen  such  one  who  takes  his  passion  as 
God-25: 43Q?.  The  Prophet  said:  The  worst  deity  in  the  sight  of 
God  that  is  worshipped  in  the  world  is  the  deity  of  passion. 
Idol  worship  is  also  done  according  to  the  wishes  of  passion. 
For  this  reason,  the  soul  of  such  a  man  inclines  towards  the 
religion  of  his  ancestors.  Such  a  man  is  like  one  who  rises  up  in 
the  morning  and  says  facing  the  Ka'ba:  I  have  turned  my  face 
towards  One  who  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  but  he 
really  does  not  turn  his  heart  towards  God  and  begins  the  day 
with  a  lie.  The  direction  of  the  Ka'ba  is  not  the  direction  of 
God.  He  who  turns  his  face  towards  the  Ka'ba  can't  be  called  to 
have  turned  his  face  towards  God  as  God  is  not  confined 
within  space  and  direction.  Mind  is  the  mine  of  Tauhid  and  its 
fountainhead.  A  man  of  Tauhid  turns  his  mind  towards  God 
and  not  towards  any  other  direction. 

ZIKR  OR  TAZKIR  (God's  Remembrance).  This  is  the 
science  of  invocation  and  admonition.  God  says:  Remind  them 
because  Zikr  or  admonition  benefits  the  believers-51:55Q.  There 
are  many  traditions  regarding  the  merits  of  the  assemblies  of 
Zikr.  The  Prophet  said:  When  you  pass  by  the  garden  of  paradise, 
enjoy  yourselves.  He  was  asked:  What  are  the  gardens  of 
Paradise?  He  said:  Assemblies  of  Zikr  (remembrance  of  God). 
The  Prophet  said:  The  angels  of  God  roam  in  the  horizon  except 
the  angels  of  creation.  When  they  see  any  assembly  of  Zikr,  they 
accost  themselves  and  say:  Come  unto  your  goals.  They  then 
come  to  the  place,  surround  them  and  hear  them,  remember  God 
and  take  lessons.  Now  the  assembly  of  Zikr  means  the  assembly 
of  lectures  wherein  the  modern  lecturers  deliver  long  speeches, 


48  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

tell  stories,  recite  poems  and  poetries  and  sing  songs.  Such  was 
not  the  practice  at  the  time  of  the  four  rightly  guided  Caliphs. 


Story-telling  is  an  innovation.  Ibn  Omar  once  came  out  of  the 
mosque  exclaiming:  None  has  sent  me  out  except  a  story-teller. 
Hazrat  Ali  turned  out  the  story  tellers  from  the  congregational 
mosque  of  Basra.  He  did  not  turn  out  Hasan  Basari  as  he  used  to 
deal  with  the  hereafter,  contemplation  of  death,  defects  of  soul, 
machinations  of  the  devil.  Such  is  the  assembly  about  which  the 
Prophet  said:  To  be  present  at  the  assembly  of  Zikr  is  better  than 
one  thousand  rak'ats  of  prayers,  visiting  one  thousand  sick  men 
and  attending  one  thousand  funerals.  Hazrat  Ata  said:  One 
assembly  of  Zikr  expiates  the  sins  of  seventy  assemblies  of  ' 
useless  talks.  The  Prophet  once  heard  three  talks  from  Abdullah- 
b-Rawahah  and  said:  O  Abu  Rawahah,  keep  yourself  far  from 
ornamental  talks.  He  asked  the  Prophet  one  day  about  the  blood 
money  of  a  child  which  died  in  the  womb  of  its  mother  saying: 
How  shall  we  pay  the  blood  wit  of  a  child  who  has  taken  no  food, 
no  drink,  nor  cried,  nor  breathed.  Such  murder  is  excusable.  The 
Prophet  said:  are  you  like  the  desert  Arabs  who  indulge  in 
ornamental  words? 

POETRY:  As  to  poetry,  its  general  use  in  sermons  is  bad.  God 
says:  As  to  poets,  those  who  go  astray  follow  them.  Don't  you 
find  the  wondering  in  every  valley  and  say  what  they  do  not 
do-26  255?  God  said:  I  did  not  teach  him  (Prophet)  poetry,  nor  it 
is  becoming  of  him.  Furthermore  what  is  narrated  of  poetries  is 
sermons  comprises  mostly  of  love  episodes,  descriptions  of  the 
beauties  of  the  beloved;  the  joys  of  union  and  pangs  of 
separation.  This  gives  arise  to  lust  and  sexual  passion  more  than 
religious  enthusiasm.  There  are  however  such  poetries  which 
contain  wisdom.  The  prophet  also  said:  There  is  wisdom  in 
poetry. 

HIKMAT:  The  word  Hakim  derived  from  the  word  Hikmat 
is  now  used  in  the  case  of  physicians,  astrologers  and  those  who 
tell  the  future  of  the  people  by  examining  hands,  but  God  says 
about  the  word  Hikmat  (wisdom):  He  gives  wisdom  whom  He 
wishes  Whoever  has  been  given  wisdom  has  been  given  a  great 
good-2:272Q.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  learns  a  word  of 
wisdom,  it  is  better  than  the  world  and  what  it  contains.  Now 
think  what  was  Hikmat  and  what  it  has  come  to.  Now  think  also 
of  the  meaning  of  many  words  which  have  come  down  to  us.  One 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  49 

day  a  man  asked  the  Prophet:  Who  is  the  worst  creature  in 
creation?  The  Prophet  said:  O  God,  pardon  me.  On  being 
repeatedly  asked,  the  Prophet  replied:  They  are  wicked  learned 
men. 

Now  you  have  come  to  know  about  praiseworthy  and 
blameworthy  sciences  and  how  the  intermingled  with  one 
another.  Now  chose  either  of  the  two.  If  you  want  good,  you  may 
follow  the  path  of  the  ancient  sages  and  saints,  and  if  you  want, 
you  may  follow  the  paths  of  the  latter  generations.  All 
knowledge  which  the  ancient  sages  loved  have  vanished.  The 
Prophet  said:  Islam  began  with  a  few  and  it  will  soon  return  to  a 
few  as  it  began.  Good  nes  to  those  few.  He  was  asked:  Who  are 
those  few?  He  said:  Those  who  purify  my  Sunnah  after  the 
people  polluted  them  and  those  who  revive  my  sunnah  after 
their  death.  In  another  narration:  The  few  are  a  few  righteous 
people  in  the  midst  of  many  unrighteous  men. 


THIRD  MATTER 

HOW  MUCH  IS  PRAISEWORTHY  OF 
THE  PRAISEWORTHY  SCIENCES? 

Knowledge  is  divided  into  three  parts.  One  part  is 
blameworthy  in  whole  or  in  part,  one  part  is  praiseworthy  in 
whole  or  in  part  and  one  part  is  praiseworthy  upto  a  certain  limit 
and  beyond  that  it  is  blameworthy.  Look  to  the  condition  of 
physique.  A  little  of  health  and  beauty  is  good,  but  a  little  of  ugly 
figure  and  bad  conduct  is  bad:  Moderate  expense  of  wealth  is 
praiseworthy  but  immoderate  expense  is  blameworthy. 

(1 )  The  knowledge  of  which  a  little  or  much  is  blameworthy 
has  got  no  benefit  either  in  this  world  or.  in  the  next,  because, 
there  is  such  harm  in  it  which  is  greater  than  its  benefit,  for 
example  magic,  astrology  or  talismnics.  A  valuable  life  should 
not  be  spent  uselessly  but  there  are  some  sciences  which  have  got 
moderate  benefits,  but  their  harms  are  greater. 

(2)  The  science  which  is  beneficial  up  to  the  end  is  the 
science  of  knowing  God,  His  attributes  and  His  works.  His  laws 
affecting  this  world  and  the  hereafter.  This  is  the  science  which  is 
sought  for  its  own  attributes  and  by  which  the  blessings  of  the 
hereafter  is  gained.  To  exert  oneself  to  the  utmost  of  one's 


50  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

capacity  to  gain  it  falls  far  short  of  what  is  required,  because  it  is 
such  a  sea  of  which  the  depth  is  unlimited.  Those  who  search  it 
are  remaining  constantly  in  its  shores  and  edges.  The  Prophet, 
the  saints  and  the  learned  with  faith  according  to  their  different 
ranks,  power  and  strength  and  according  to  the  decree  of  God 
could  not  even  navigate  its  ends.  This  is  the  hidden  science  which 
can  never  be  recorded  in  books.  For  it,  precaution  shall  have  to  be 
taken,  efforts  shall  have  to  be  made  and  the  condition  of  the 
learned  men  of  the  hereafter  shall  have  to  be  examined.  For  this 
science,  a  great  deal  of  efforts,  purification  of  mind,  renunciation 
of  the  world  and  the  following  of  the  Prophets  and  friends  of  God 
are  necessary.  He  who  does  all  these  things  earns  it  according  to 
his  fate  and  not  to  his  efforts,  but  there  is  no  escape  from  efforts  as 
efforts  are  the  only  keys  of  guidance  and  there  is  no  other  key . 

(3)  The  sciences  which  are  praiseworthy  up  to  a  certain  limit 
are  those  which  have  been  narrated  at  the  time  of  discussion  of 
Farze-Kafayah.  Each  has  got  three  limits-first  limit  up  to 
necessity,  second  up  to  moderation  and  third  up  to  excessive 
quantity  and  there  is  no  end  of  it  during  life.  Beware  of  the  two 
persons.  Either  be  busy  with  yourself  or  be  busy  after  finishing 
your  work  with  others.  Be  careful  of  correcting  others  before  you 
correct  yourself.  If  you  keep  busy  with  yourself,  be  busy  with 
acquisition  of  knowledge  which  is  compulsory  according  to  your 
need,  for  instance,  knowledge  of  open  deeds  such  as  prayer,  fast 
etc.  More  importance  however  is  the  science  which  everybody 
neglects,  It  is  the  science  of  heart.  Know  which  of  these  sciences 
are  bad  and  which  are  good  as  there  is  nobody  who  is  safe  from 
envy,  hatred,  pride,  self-conceit  and  such  other  destructive 
faults.  Performance  of  these  outward  deeds  is  like  the  external 
application  of  ointment  to  the  body  when  it  is  stricken  with 
scabies  and  boils  while  neglecting  to  remove  the  pus  by  means  of 
surgery.  The  learned  men  lay  stress  upon  the  outward  actions 
and  the  learned  men  of  the  hereafter  remove  the  impurities  of 
mind. 

So  you  should  not  engage  yourself  in  Farze  Kefayah  duties 
till  you  are  pure  in  heart  and  acquire  strength  to  give  up  open  and 
secret  sins.  Give  attention  first  to  the  Holy  Quran,  then  to  the 
Sunnah  of  the  Holy  Prophet,  then  to  Tafsirs  of  the  learned  men 
and  then  to  other  learnings.  Don't  engage  your  life  to  the  learning 
of  only  one  branch  of  education  as  life  is  short  but  the  learnings 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  51 

are  many.  The  acquisition  of  these  learnings  are  weapons  for  the 
hereafter.  There  is  no  learning  which  has  got  no  limits  of 
necessity,  moderation  and  perfection.  This  is  applicable  also  to 
Hadis,  Tafsir  and  Fiqh. 

A  certain  saint  asked  a  learned  man  in  dream:  Tell  me  the 
condition  of  learning  about  which  you  held  disputation.  He  said: 
It  has  all  vanished  like  scattered  dust,  Only  two  rak'ats  of  prayer 
at  the  latter  part  of  night  has  done  me  benefit.  The  Prophet  said: 
No  people  are  misguided  after  guidance  except  disputation. 
Then  he  read  the  following  verse:  They  did  nothing  about  you 
but  disputation.  Rather  they  are  a  contentions  people.  About  a 
verse- T3ut  they  in  whose  hearts  there  is  perversity'OiS:)  the 
Prophet  said  that  they  are  a  contentious  people  about  whom  God 
said:  Beware  of  them.  The  Prophet  said:  You  are  living  in  an  age 
when  you  receive  inspiration  for  actions  but  soon  a  people  will 
appear  who  will  be  given  to  disputation.  The  worst  men  to  God 
in  creation  are  given  to  bitter  disputes.  He  also  said:  Those. who 
has  been  given  to  disputation  have  not  been  given  actions. 

SECTION-4 

HARMS  OF  THE  SCIENCE  OF  POLEMICS  AND  EVILS 
OF  DEBATES  AND  DISPUTATIONS. 

Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  after  the  Prophet,  the  rightly-guided 
Caliphs  were  the  leaders  of  the  learned  in  the  science  of  God.  They 
were  the  eyes  of  knowledge  and  were  experienced  in  the  legal 
decisions.  They  did  not  take  the  help  of  jurisprudents  except  in 
cases  where  consultation  was  necessary.  They  decided  on  the 
strength  of  Ijtihad  and  their  decisions  were  recorded  in  their  lives. 
After  their  death,  Caliphate  went  to  those  who  were  not  so 
experienced  in  legal  matters  and  administrative  affairs.  They  were 
compelled  to  seek  the  aid  of  jurisprudents.  At  that  time,  a  band  of 
Tabeyins  (successors  of  companions)  were  alive  and  they  persisted 
in  following  strictly  the  injunctions  of  religion.  Whenever  the 
Caliphs  called  them,  they  fled.  But  some  learned  men  used  to  mix 
with  the  Caliphs  and  consequently  became  humiliated.  Therefore 
there  were  differences  of  opinions  among  the  learned  men  and 
there  grew  different  Mazhabs  or  sects  as  a  result.  There  were 
argumentations  and  disputations  over  the  intricate  questions  of 
religion.  They  composed  also  many  works  on  these  subjects.  This 
induced  the  people  to  take  the  controversies  and  disputations. 


52  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

THERE  ARE  EIGHT  CONDITIONS 
OF  DEBATES 

(1)  The  first  condition  is  that  where  debate  for  search  of  truth 
is  one  of  Farze  Kefayah  duties,  one  who  has  not  already  fulfilled 
his  part  in  duties  of  Farze  Ain  should  not  engage  himself  in  the 
debates  even  for  searching  truth. 

(2)  The  second  condition  is  that  one  should  not  consider 
debates  more  important  than  Farze-Kefayah  duties. 

He  commits  sin  who  does  other  works  leaving  aside  a  more 
important  Farze  Kefayah  duty.  He  is  like  a  man  who  does  not 
give  water  to  drink  to  people  who  are  thirsty  and  facing  death 
even  though  he  has  got  power  to  do  so,  beacause  he  remains  then 
busy  in  giving  lesson  of  cupping.  Once  the  Prophet  was  asked  : 
When  will  the  people  give  up  enjoining  good  and  fobidding  evil? 
The  Prophet  said :  When  flattery  will  grow  in  good  people  among 
you,  kingdom  will  go  to  the  meanest  of  you  and  theology  to  those 
who  will  be  corrupt. 

(3)  The  third  condition  which  justifies  debate  is  that  the  debater 
should  have  ability  and  give  decision  on  his  own  responsiblility 
without  referring  to  the  opinion  of  Imam  Abu  Hanfia  or  any  other 
Imams.  He  who  has  not  the  ability  of  independent  interpretation 
should  not  express  his  opinion  but  should  refer  it  to  an  Imam. 

(4)  The  fourth  condition  which  justifies  debate  is  that  the 
subject  for  decision  should  be  about  actual  cases  that  crop  up,  for 
example,  the  question  of  inheritance  and  not  about  future  cases. 
The  companions  also  held  consutations  as  questions  arose  or 
were  likely  to  arise  in  order  to  arrive  at  truth. 

(5)  The  fifth  condition  is  that  debate  should  be  held  in  priavte 
in  preference  to  open  meetings  in  presence  of  noted  people  and 
in  grandeur  because  privacy  is  more  suitable  for  clear  thinking 
and  to  examine  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong. 

(6)  The  sixth  condition  is  that  the  debater  should  like  truth  in 
the  same  spirit  as  a  lost  thing  is  searched  for.  He  should  not  mind 
weather  the  truth  is  found  by  him  or  by  his  adversery.  when 
Hazrat  Omar  was  once  giving  sermon,  a  woman  pointed  out  to 
him  his  mistake  to  which  he  submitted.  At  another  time,  Hazrat 
Ali  was  asked  a  question  by  a  man  and  he  replied.  When  the  man 
pointed  cut  his  mistake,  he  admitted  it. 


Vol-I  '  KNOWLEDGE  53 

(7)  The  seventh  condition  is  that  the  debater  should  not 
prevent  his  adversary  from  giving  up  one  argument  in  favour  of 
another  and  one  illustration  in  favour  of  another. 

(8)  The  eighth  condition  is  that  debate  should  be  held  with 
such  person  from  whom  benefit  is  derived  and  who  is  learned. 

From  these  eight  conditions,  you  will  be  able  to  distinguish 
those  who  debate  for  the  sake  of  God  and  those  who  debate  for 
other  purposes. 

THIRD  MATTER-EVILS  OF  DEBATES 

The  following  evils  arise  out  of  modern  debates. 

(1)  ENVY:  The  Prophet  said  :  Envy  consumes  good  deeds  as 
fire  consumes  fuels.  A  debater  is  never  free  from  envy  and 
hatred.  Envy  is  a  burning  fire.  One  who  falls  in  it  gets 
punishement  in  the  world.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said  :  Acquire 
knowledge  wherever  it  is  found  and  don't  obey  the  devils  who 
are  prone  to  disputes. 

(2)  PRIDE:  The  Prophet  said :  A  believer  cannot  have  pride  in 
him.  There  is  'a'Hadis  Qudsi  in  which  God  said :  Grandeur  is  My 
cloak  and  pride  is  My  mantle.  I  destory  one  who  snatches 
anything  of  these  two  from  Me. 

(3)  RANCOUR:  A  debater  is  seldom  free  from  the  evil  of 
rancour.  The  Propherr  said :  A  believer  has  got  no  rancour. 

(4)  BACK-BITING  which  is  likened  by  God  to  the  eating  of 
carrion  (49:12).  A  debater  ascribes  to  his  oppoinent  foolishness, 
ignorance  and  stupidity. 

(5)  DECLARATION  OF  SELF-PURITY.  God  says  :  Don't 
attribute  purity  ot  yourself.  He  knows  best  who  fears  Him  (53:33). 

(6)  SPYING  and  prying  into  the  secrets  of  adversary.  God 
says:  Pry  not  (49:12). 

(7)  HYPOCRISY.  A  debater  expresses  his  friendship  for  his 
adversary  outwardly  but  he  cherishes  hatred  for  him  inwardly. 
The  Prophet  said:  When  the  learned  men  do  not  translate  their 
learning  into  action,  when  they  profess  love  for  one  another  with 
their  tongue  and  nurse  hatred  in  their  hearts,  when  they  sever  the 


54  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

ties  of  relationship,  God  sends  curse  upon  them,  makes  their 
tongues  mute  and  their  eyes  blind. 

(8)  TO  TURN  AWAY  FROM  TRUTH.  The  most  hateful 
thing  to  a  debater  is  to  reject  the  truth  revealed  to  his  adversary 
and  thus  he  takes  to  deception  and  deceit.  The  Prophet 
prohibited  dispute  about  useless  things.  He  said  :  If  a  man  gives 
up  disputation  in  matters  of  unlawful  things,  a  garden  will  be 
built  for  him  in  paradise.  If  a  man  gives  up  desputation  in  matters 
of  truth,  a  house  will  be  built  up  for  him  in  the  highest  paradise. 
God  said  :  He  is  more  wrongful  than  one  who  devises  a  lie 
against  God  and  calls  the  truth  a  lie  when  it  comes  to  him  29:68. 
God  said  :  Who  is  more  wrongful  that  he  who  lies  against  God 
and  trea  ts  the  truth  when  it  comes  to  him  as  a  lie-39:33  ? 

(9)  ANOTHER  FAULT  OF  DEBATE  IS  SHOW  AND 
FLATTERING  the  people  in  an  effort  *o  win  their  favour  and  to 
nislead  them.  Hypocrisy  is  the  greatest  disease  with  which  a 
debater  is  attacked  and  it  is  a  major  sin. 

(10)  DECEPTION.  Debators  and  compelled  to  deception. 

These  ten  evils  are  the  secret  major  sins  arising  out  of  debates 
and  disputations.  Besides  these  major  offences,  there  arise  many 
other  guilts  out  of  controversies  leading  to  blows,  kicks,  boxing, 

tearing  of  garments  etc. 

■ 
The  learned  men  are  of  three  classes.  One  class  comprise 
those  who  ruin  themselves  and  also  ruin  others.  Another  class 
make  themselves  fortunate  and  make  other  also  fortunate.  Such 
learned  men  call  others  towards  good.  The  third  class  learned 
men  call  ruin  to  themselves  but  make  others  fortunate. 

SECTION  5 

Manners  to  be  observed  by  teachers  and  students.  These 
manners  comprise  ten  duties. 

(1)  The  first  duty  of  a  student  is  to  keep  himself  free  from 
impure  habit  and  evil  matters.  Effort  to  acquire  knowledge  is  the 
worship  of  mind.  It  purifies  secret  faults  and  takes  to  God.  Prayer 
is  observed  by  outward  organs  and  as  outward  purity  is  not 
gained  except  by  outward  organs,  so  worship  by  mind,  the 
fountain  head  of  acquisition  of  knowledge,  cannot  be  attained 
without  the  removal  of  bad  habits  and  evil  attributes.  The 


Vol-I  '  KNOWLEDGE  55 

Prophet  said  :  Religion  is  founded  on  cleanliness.  So  outward 
and  inward  purities  are  necessary.  God  sys  :  The  polytheists  are 
impure  9:  28Q.  It  is  understood  from  this  that  purity  and 
impurity  are  not  merely  external  as  the  polytheists  also  keep 
their  dresses  clean  and  bodies  clean,  but  as  their  mind  is  impure, 
so  they  are  generally  impure.  The  inward  purity  is  of  greatest 
importance.  The  Prophet  therefore  said  :  Angels  do  not  enter  a 
house  wherein  there  are  dogs.  Human  mind  is  a  house,  the 
abode  of  angels,  the  place  of  their  movements  The  blameworthy 
evils  like  anger,  lust,  rancour,  envy,  pride,  conceit  and  the  like  are 
dogs.  When  dogs  reside  in  a  heart,  where  is  the  place  for  the 
angels?  God  takes  the  secrets  of  knowledge  to  the  hearts  throught 
the  angels.  They  do  not  take  it  except  to  the  pure  souls.  Hazrat 
Ibn  Masud  said  :  Knowledge  is  not  acquired  through  much 
learning.  It  is  a  light  cast  in  heart.  A  certain  sage  said :  Knowledge 
is  God-fear  as  God  said :  The  learned  among  the  people  fear  God 
most. 

,  (2)  The  second  duty  of  a  student  is  to  reduce  his  worldly 
affairs  and  keep  aloof  :  from  kith  and  kin  as  acquisition  of 
knowledge  is  not  possible  in  these  environments.  For  this  reason, 
a  certain  sage  said  :  God  has  not  gifted  two  minds  to  a  man.  For 
this  reason,  a  certain  sage  said  :  Knowledge  will  not  give  you  its 
full  share  till  you  surrender  your  entire  mind  to  it. 

(3)  The  third  duty  of  a  student  is  not  to  take  pride  or  exalt 
himself  over  the  teacher  but  rather  entrust  to  him  the  conduct  of 
all  his  affairs  and  submit  to  his  advices  as  a  patient  submits  to  his 
physician.  The  Prophet  said  :  It  is  the  habit  of  a  believer  not  to 
flatter  anyone  except  when  he  seeks  knowledge.  Therefore  a 
student  should  not  take  pride  over  his  teacher.  Knowledge 
cannot  be  acquirred  except  through  modesty  and  humility.  God 
said  :  Herein  there  is  warning  for  one  who  has  got  a  heart  or  sets 
up  ear  while  he  himself  being  a  witness-50:36.  The  meaning  of 
having  a  heart  is  to  be  fit  for  receiving  knowledge  and  one  who  is 
prepared  and  capable  of  understanding  knowledge.  Whatever 
the  teacher  should  recommend  to  the  student,  the  latter  should 
follow  it  putting  aside  his  own  opinion.  The  people  should 
question  only  in  the  matter  which  the  teacher  permits  him.  Here 
there  is  an  instance  of  Moses  and  Khizir  Khizir  said :  You  will  not 
ask  me  anything  I  do.  Still  Moses  questioned  him  and  for  that  he 
separated  him. 


56  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

(4)  The  fourth  duty  of  a  student  is  that  he  should  first  pay  no 
attention  to  the  difference  whether  about  wordly  sciences  or 
sciences  of  the  hereafter  as  it  may  perplex  his  mind  and  he  may 
lose  enthusiasm.  He  should  adopt  first  what  the  teacher  says  and 
should  not  argue  about  the  different  mazhabs  or  sects. 

(5)  The  fifth  duty  is  that  a  student  should  not  miss  any  branch 
of  knowledge.  He  should  try  to  become  perfect  in  them  as  all 
branches  of  learning  help  one  another  and  some  branches  are 
allied  with  others.  If  a  man  does  not  get  a  things,  it  becomes  his 
enemy.  God  says :  When  they  do  not  find  guidance  they  say,  it  is 
an  age-long  lie  46:10  A  poet  said  :  A  sweet  thing  is  bitter  in  the 
mouth  of  a  patient  as  sweet  water  is  tasteless  to  a  sick  man.  Good 
knowledge  is  acquired  according  to  one's  genius.  It  leads  man  to 
God  or  helps  him  in  that  way.  Each  branch  of  knowledge  has  got 
its  fixed  place.  He  who  guards  it,  is  like  a  guard  who  patrols  the 
frontiers  in  jihad.  Each  has  got  a  rank  in  it  and  each  has  got  a 
reward  in  the  hereafter  according  to  his  rank.  The  only  condition 
required  is  that  the  object  of  acquisition  of  knowledge  should  be 
to  please  God. ' 

(6)  The  sixth  duty  of  a  student  is  that  he  should  not  take  up  all 
branches  of  knowledge  at  a  time,  but  should  take  up  the  most 
important  one  at  first  as  life  is  not  sufficient  for  all  branches  of 
knowledge.  A  little  learing  if  acquired  with  enthusiasm  perfects 
the  knowledge  of  the  hereafter  or  the  sciences  of  the  worldly 
usages  and  the  sciences  of  revelation.  The  object  of  the  science  of 
worldly  usages  is  to  acquire  spiritual  knowledge.  The  goal  of  the 
spiritual  knowledge  is  to  know  God.  Our  object  by  this 
knowledge  is  not  that  belief  which  is  handed  down  from 
generations  to  generations.  Our  object  for  this  knowledge  is  to 
acquire  light  arising  out  of  certain  faith  which  God  casts  in  soul. 
Such  light  was  acquired  by  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr.  The  Prophet  said 
about  Abu  Bakr:  If  the  faith  of  the  people  of  the  world  is  weighed 
with  the  faith  of  Abu  Bakr,  his  faith  would  be  heavy.  In  short,  the 
highest  and  the  noblest  of  all  science,  is  to  know  God  This  science 
is  like  a  sea  of  which  the  depth  cannot  be  ascertained.  In  this 
science,  the  highest  rank  is  that  of  the  Prophets,  then  of  the 
friends  of  God  and  finally  that  of  those  who  follow  them.  It  has 
been  narrated  that  the  portraits  of  two  ancient  wise  men  were 
seen  on  the  wall  of  a  mosque.  One  of  them  held  a  peice  of  paper  in 
which  it  was  written:  If  you  purify  everything,  don't  understand 


i 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  57 

that  you  have  even  purified  one  thing  till  you  know  God  and 
know  that  He  is  the  cause  of  all  Causes  and  the  Creator  of 
everything.  In  the  hand  of  the  second  man,  there  was  a  scroll  in 
which  it  was  writen  :  I  removed  thirst  before  by  drinking  water 
and  then  I  have  come  to  know  God.  But  when  I  have  come  to 
know  God,  my  thirst  was  quenched  without  any  water. 

(7)  The  seventh  duty  of  a  student  is  that  he  should  not  take  up 
a  new  branch  of  learning  till  he  has  leamt  fully  the  previous 
branch  of  learning,  because  it  is  requisite  for  the  acquisition  of 
knowledge.  One  branch  of  knowledge  is  a  guide  to  another 
branch.  God  says  :  Whoso  has  been  given  the  Quran  recities  it 
with  due  recitation-2:15  In  other  words,  he  does  not  take  up  one 
learning  till  he  masters  the  previous  one.  Hazrat  Ali  said :  Dont't 
-onceal  truth  form  men,  rather  know  the  truth,  then  you  will  be 
>  -m  master  of  truths. 

(8)  The  eighth  duty  of  a  studnet  is  to  know  the  causes  for 
which  noble  sciences  are  known.  It  can  be  known  from  two 
things,  nobility  of  its  fruit  and  the  anthenriciry  of  its  principles. 
Take  for  example  the  science  of  religion  as  medicine.  The  fruit  of 
the  science  of  religion  is  to  gain  an  eternal  life  and  the  fruit  of  the 
other  is  to  gain  a  temporary  life.  From  these  points  of  view,  the 
science  of  religion  is  more  noble  as  its  result  is  more  noble.  Take 
up  Mathematics  and  Astrology,  the  former  is  nobler  because  the 
former  is  more  authentic  in  its  foundations.  From  this,  it  is  clear 
that  the  science  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  of  His  angels,  of  His 
books  and  of  His  prophets  is  the  noblest  and  also  the  branches  of 
knowledge  which  help  it. 

(9)  The  ninth  duty  of  a  student  is  to  purify  mind  and  action 
with  virtues,  to  gain  proximity  to  God  and  His  angles  and  to  live 
in  the  company  of  those  who  live  near  Him.  His  aim  should  not 
be  to  gain  worldly  matters,  to  acquire  riches  and  properties,  to 
argue  with  the  illiterate  and  to  show  pride  and  haughtiness.  He 
whose  object  is  to  gain  nearness  of  God  should  seek  such  learning 
as  helps  towards  that  goal,  namely  the  knowledge  of  the 
hereaafter  and  the  learnings  which  are  auxiliary  to  it.  God  said  : 
God  will  raise  herewith  in  rank  who  are  believers  and  to  whom 
knowledge  have  been  given-58:ll .  God  said  :  They  have  got 
stages,  some  lower,  some  higher.  The  highest  rank  is  that  of  the 
Prophets,  then  of  the  friends  of  God  and  then  of  the  learned  who 
are  firm  in  knowledge  and  then  of  the  pious  who  follow  them. 


58  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

(10)  The  tenth  duty  of  a  student  is  that  he  should  keep 
attention  to  the  primary  object  of  knowledge.  It  is  not  in  your 
power  to  enjoy  bliss  of  this  world  and  that  of  the  next  world 
together.  This  world  is  a  temprory  abode.  Body  is  a  conveyance 
and  the  actions  run  towars  the  goal.  The  goal  is  God  and  nothing 
else.  All  bliss  and  happines  lie  in  Him.  So  give  more  importance 
to  the  sciences  which  take  to  that  ultimate  goal. 

There  are  three  kinds  of  learnings. 

(1)  One  kind  of  learning  is  like  the  purchase  of  commodities 
in  journey.  They  are  the  sciences  of  medicine,  laws  (Fiqh)  and  all 
other  sciences  which  keep  connection  with  the  welfare  of  the 
people  in  the  world. 

(2)  Another  class  of  learning  is  like  the  science  of  travelling  in 
the  desert  and  surmounting  obstacles.  They  purify  the  mind 
from  evil  traits  and  take  it  to  a  high  place  that  does  not  fall  to  the 
lot  of  any  except  to  those  whom  God  shows  favour. 

(3)  The  third  kind  of  knoweldge  is  like  the  knowledge  of 
pilgrimage  and  its  rules  and  regulations.  This  is  the  science  of 
knowledge  of  God,  His  attitutes  and  the  knowldge  of  the  actions 
of  angels.  This  is  the  knowledge  which  can  not  be  gained  except 
by  the  agnostics  who  are  close  to  Him.  Those  who  are  lower  in 
rank  than  them  will  get  also  salvation.  God  says :  As  for  one  who 
is  of  those  nearest  to  God,  there  is  happiness,  bounty  and  garden 
of  bliss  for  him.  But  as  for  one  who  is  of  the  companions  of  the 
right  hand  there  is  peace  for  him-56:87.  This  is  a  certain  truth 
which  they  perceived  through  contemplations.  This  is  more  clear 
than  Seeing  with  eyes.  They  are  confirmed  in  their  faith  after 
seeing  for  themselves.  Others  are  like  those  who  have  got  faith 
but  without  contemplation  and  without  seeing  with  their  own 
eyes. 

By  the  soul,  I  don't  mean  heart  made  up  of  flesh  but  it  is  a 
subtle  Sir  or  secret  essence  which  the  bodily  senses  fail  to 
perceive.  It  is  a  spiritual  substance  from  God  and  has  been 
described  sometimes  by  Nafs,  sometimes  by  Qalb.  The  material 
heart  is  the  vehicle  for  the  spiritual  essence  to  remove  the  veil 
from  it  as  it  belongs  to  the  science  of  revelation,  a  sceince  which  is 
withheld  from  men  and  there  is  no  permission  to  discuss  it.  What 
is  permissible  is  the  discussion  that  it  is  a  precious  jewel  and 
belongs  to  the  world  of  spirit  and  not  to  the  world  of  matter.  God 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  59 

says  :  They  ask  you  about  soul.  Say  :  Soul  proceeds  from  the 
command  of  my  Lord-17:87.  The  connection  of  soul  with  God  is 
nobler  than  that  of  all  the  bodily  limbs.  To  God  belong  the 
creation  and  the  command  is  the  most  precious  thing  which  can 
carry  the  trust  of  God.  It  is  nobler  than  the  heaven  and  the  earth 
and  what  they  contain  as  the  latter  refused  to  bear  the  trust  out  of 
fear  of  the  spiritual  world.  It  has  come  from  God  and  it  will  return  to 
God.  It  is  the  spiritual  substance  which  drives  towards  God. 

SECOND  SUBJECT-DUTIES  OF  A  TEACHER 

A  man  has  got  four  conditions  in  relation  to  wealth.  A 
wealthy  man  at  first  produces  commodities.  Secondly  he  hoards 
his  productions  and  does  not  seek  the  aid  of  others,  Thirdly,  he 
spends  it  for  himself  and  rests  satisfied  with  it.  Fourthly,  he 
spends  there  from  for  another  to  get  honour.  The  last  is  the  best. 
Similar  are  the  conditions  of  knowledge.  It  is  acquired  like 
wealth  and  has  got  four  conditions.  -  (1)  condition  of  acquisition 
of  knowledge,  (2)  condition  after  acquisition  of  knowledge,  (3) 
condition  wherein  he  will  contemplate  and  enjoy  his 
achievement  and  (4)  condition  wherein  he  would  impart  his 
knowledge  to  others  and  this  last  condition  is  the  best.  He  who 
acquires  knowledge  and  acts  up  to  it  and  teaches  it  to  the  people 
is  noble  to  the  angels  of  heaven  and  earth.  He  is  like  the  sun 
which  illumines  itself  and  gives  light  to  other  things.  Such  a  man 
is  like  a  pot  of  musk  which  is  full  of  fragance  and  gives  fragrance 
to  others.  He  who  teaches  knowledge  to  others  but  does  not 
himself  act  up  to  it  is  like  a  note-book  which  does  not  benefit 
itself  but  benefits  others  or  like  an  instrument  which  gives  edge 
to  iron  but  itself  has  got  no  edge,  or  like  a  needle  which  remains 
naked  but  sews  clothing  for  others,  or  like  a  lamp  which  gives 
light  to  other  things  but  itself  burns. 

A  poet  said  :- 

"Knowledge  without  action  is  like  a  glowing  wick, 
it  gives  light  to  others  but  itself  dies  burning. 

Whoever  takes  up  the  profession  of  teaching  should  observe 
the  following  duties  > 

(1)  He  will  show  kindness  and  sympatty  to  the  students  and 
treat  them  as  his  own  children.  The  Prophet  said  :  'I  am  to  you 
like  a  father  to  his  son.'  His  object  should  be  to  protect  the  student 


60  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

from  the  fire  of  Hell.  As  parents  save  their  children  from  the  fire 
of  this  world,  so  a  teacher  should  save  his  students  or  disciples 
from  the  fire  of  Hell.  The  duties  of  a  teacher  are  more  that  those 
of  parents.  A  father  is  the  immediate  cause  of  this  transient  life, 
but  a  teacher  is  the  cause  of  immortal  life.  It  is  because  of  the 
spiritual  teacher  that  the  hereafter  is  much  remembered.  By 
teacher,  I  mean  the  teacher  of  the  sciences  of  the  hereafter  or  the 
sciences  of  the  world  with  the  object  of  the  hereafter.  A  teacher 
ruins  himself  and  also  his  students  if  he  teaches  for  the  sake  of  the 
world.  For  this  reason,  the  people  of  the  hereafter  are  journeying 
towards  the  next  world  and  to  God  and  remain  absent  from  the 
world.  The  months  and  years  of  this  world  are  so  many  stations 
of  their  journey.  There  is  no  miserliness  in  the  fortunes  of  the  nxet 
world  and  so  there  is  no  envy  among  them.  They  turn  to  the 
verse:  "The  believers  are  brethren"-49:10. 

(2)  The  second  duty  of  a  teacher  is  to  follow  the  usages  and 
ways  of  the  Prophet.  In  other  words,  he  should  not  seek 
remuneration  for  teaching  but  nearness  to  God  therefor.  God 
instructs  us  to  say  :  Say,  I  don't  want  any  remuneration  for  this 
from  you-9:31.  Wealth  and  property  are  the  servants  of  body 
which  is  the  vehicle  of  soul  of  which  the  essence  is  knowledge 
and  for  which  there  is  honour  of  soul.  He  who  searches  wealth  in 
lieu  of  knowledge  is  like  one  who  has  got  his  face  besmeared  with 
impurities  but  wants  to  cleanse  his  body.  In  that  case,  the  master 
is  made  a  servant  and  the  servant  a  master. 

(3)  The  third  duty  of  a  teacher  is  that  he  should  not 
withhold  from  his  students  any  advice.  After  he  finishes  the 
outword  sciences,  he  should  teach  them  the  inward  sciences. 
He  should  tell  them  that  the  object  of  education  is  to  gain 
nearness  of  God,  not  power  or  richnes  and  that  God  created 
ambition  as  a  means  of  perpetuating  knowledge  which  is 
essential  for  these  sciences. 

(4)  The  fourth  duty  of  a  teacher  is  to  dissuade  his  students 
from  evil  ways  with  care  and  caution,  with  sympathy  and  not 
with  rebuke  and  harshness,  because»in  that  case  it  destroys  the 
veil  of  awe  and  encourages  disobedience.  The  Holy  Prophet  is 
the  guide  of  all  teachers.  He  said  :  If  men  had  been  forbidden  to 
make  parridge  of  camel's  dung,  they  would  have  done  it  saying 
that  they  would  not  have  been  forbidden  to  do  it  unless  there  has 
been  some  good  in  it.' 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  61 

(5)  The  fifth  duty  of  a  teacher  is  that  he  shall  not  belittle  the 
value  of  other  sciences  before  his  students.  He  who  teaches 
grammer  naturally  thinks  the  science  of  jurisprudence  as  bad 
and  he  who  teaches  jurisprudence  discourages  the  science  of 
traditions  and  so  on.  Such  evils  are  blameworthy.  In  fact  the 
teacher  of  one  learning  should  prepare  his  students  for  study  of 
other  learnings  and  then  he  should  observe  the  rules  of  gradual 
progress  from  one  stage  to  another. 

(6)  The  sixt  duty  that  a  teacher  should  do  is  to  teach  his 
students  up  to  the  power  of  their  understanding.  The  students 
should  not  be  taught  such  things  as  are  beyond  the  capacity  of 
their  understanding.  In  this  matter,  he  should  follow  the 
Prophet  who  said  :  We  prophets  form  one  class.  We  have 
been  commanded  to  give  every  man  his  rightful  place  and  to 
speak  to  men  according  to  their  intellect.  The  Prophet  said  : 
When  a  man  speaks  such  a  word  to  a  people  who  cannot  grasp 
it  with  their  intellect,  it  becomes  a  danger  to  some  persons. 
Hazrat  AH  said  pointing  out  to  his  breast  :  'There  is  much 
knowledge  in  it,  but  then  there  should  be  some  people  to 
understand  it.  The  hearts  of  pious  men  are  graves  of  secret 
matter.'  From  this,  it  is  understood  that  whatever  the  teacher 
knows  should  not  all  be  communicated  to  the  students  at  the 
same  time.  Jesus  Christ  said  :  Don't  hang  pearls  around  the 
neck  of  a  swine.  Wisome  is  better  than  pearls.  He  who  knows  it 
as  bad  is  worse  than  swine.  Once  a  learned  man  was 
questioned  about  something  but  he  gave  no  reply.  The 
questioner  said  :  Have  you  not  heard  that  the  Prophet  said?- 
He  who  conceals  any  useful  knowledge  will  on  the 
Resurrection  Day  be  bridled  with  a  bridle  of  fire."  The  learned 
man  said :  You  may  place  the  bridle  of  fire  and  go. 

If  I  don't  disclose  it  to  one  who  understands  it,  then  put  the 
bridle  of  fire  upon  me.  God  said:  Don't  give  to  the  fools  your 
property  (4  : 4).  There  is  warning  in  this  verse  that  it  is  better  to 
safeguard  knowledge  from  those  who  might  be  corrupted  by  it. 
To  give  a  thing  to  one  who  is  not  fit  for  it  and  not  to  give  a  thing  to 
one  who  is  fit  for  it  are  equally  oppression.  A  certain  poet 
therefore  said: 

Should  I  cast  pearls  before  the  illiterate  shepherds? 
They  will  not  understand,  nor  know  thir  worth. 


62  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

If  God  by  His  knowledge  sends  one  with  knowledge,  I  will 
give  my  goods  to  him,  and  gain  his  love.  He  wastes  his  learning 
who  gives  it  to  one  unworthy.  He  commits  sin  who  witholds  it 
from  one  worthy. 

(7)  The  seventh  duty  of  a  teacher  is  that  he  should  teach  his 
backward  students  only  such  things  as  are  clear  and  suited  to 
their  limited  understanding.  Every  man  thinks  that  his  wisdom  is 
perfect  and  the  greatest  fool  is  he  who  rests  satisfied  with  the 
knowledge  that  his  intellect  is  perfect.  In  short,  the  door  of 
debates  should  not  be  opened  before  the  common  men. 

(8)  The  eighth  duty  of  a  teacher  is  that  he  should  himself  do 
what  he  teaches  and  should  not  give  a  lie  to  his  teaching. 
Knowledge  can  be  grasped  by  internal  eye  and  actions  by 
external  eye.  Many  people  have  got  external  eyes  but  very  few 
have  got  internal  eye.  So  if  the  actions  of  a  teacher  are  contrary 
to  what  he  preaches,  it  does  not  help  towards  guidance,  but  it 
is  like  poison.  A  teacher  is  like  a  stamp  to  clay  and  a  student  is 
like  clay.  If  the  stamp  has  no  character,  there  is  no  impression 
on  clay.  Or  he  is  like  a  cane  and  the  student  is  like  the  shadow 
of  the  cane.  How  can  the  shadow  of  the  cane  be  straight  when 
the  cane  itself  is  crooked?  God  said:  Do  you  enjoin  good  to  the 
people  and  forget  it  for  yourselves  -  2  :  44?  Hazrat  AH  said: 
Two  men  have  broken  my  back,  the  learned  man  who  ruins 
himself  and  the  fool  who  adopts  asceticism.  The  learned  man 
misleads  the  people  through  his  sins  and  the  fool  through  his 
evil  actions. 

SECTION  6 

EVILS  OF  KNOWLEDGE  AND  SIGNS  OF  THE  LEARNED 
MAN  OF  THE  HEREAFTER 

We  have  enumerated  the  excellence  of  knowledge  and 
learned  men,  but  a  great  warning  has  come  about  the  dishonest 
learned  men.  For  this  reason,  one  should  know  the  differences  of 
the  learned  men  of  this  world  and  the  learned  men  of  the 
hereafter.  What  I  mean  by  the  learned  man  of  the  world  is  that  his 
object  of  learning  is  to  live  in  ease  and  comforts  and  to  get  honour 
and  prestige  from  the  people.  The  Prophet  said:  The  most 
severely  punished  among  men  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection  will  be 
a  learned  man  whom  God  has  not  blessed  on  .account  of  his 
knowledge.  The  Prophet  said:  Nobody  can  be  learned  unless  he 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  63 

puts  his  learning  into  practice.  He  said:  Knowledge  is  of  two 
kinds-knowledge  by  tongue  which  is  open  proof  of  God  for  the 
children  of  Adam  and  the  science  of  soul  which  is  useful.  He  said: 
In  the  latter  days,  there  will  be  ignorant  worshippers  and  sinning 
learned  men.  He  said:  Don't  acquire  knowledge  to  boast  over  the 
learned  nor  dispute  with  the  ignorant  and  gain  popularity 
among  the  people.  He  who  does  this  will  go  to  Hell.  He  said:  He 
who  conceals  his  knowledge  will  be  given  by  God  a  bridle  of  fire. 
He  said:  I  fear  most  for  one  who  appears  as  Anti-Christ  than 
Anti-Christ  himself.  Someone  asked  him:  Who  is  he?  He  said:  I 
fear  most  for  the  misguided  leaders.  He  said:  He  whose 
knowledge  is  great  but  guidance  less  is  away  from  God.  Jesus 
Christ  said:  How  can  you  guide  the  night  travellers  along  the 
right  way  when  you  yourself  are  perplexed?  These  and  other 
traditions  show  that  a  learned  man  faces  eternal  happiness  or 
eternal  damnation. 

SAYINGS  OF  WISE-MEN 

Hazrat  Osman  said:  I  fear  most  for  this  nation  the  hypocrite 
learned  men.  People  asked:  How  can  a  hypocrite  be  a  learned 
man?  He  replied:  He  has  verbal  knowledge,  but  his  mind  and  his 
actions  are  ignorant.  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  Don't  be  included 
within  those  persons  who  are  learned  in  wisdom  and  knowledge 
but  are  equal  to  the  ignorant  in  actions.  Khalid-b- Ahmed  said: 
There  are  four  kinds  of  men  -  (1)  One  who  has  real  knowledge 
and  knows  that  he  knows.  He  is  a  real  learned  man.  (2)  One  who 
has  knowledge  but  he  does  not  know  that  he  knows.  Be  careful  of 
him.  (3)  One  who  has  no  knowledge  and  knows  that  he  does  not 
know.  Such  a  man  is  fit  to  be  guided,  so  guide  him.  (4)  One  who 
has  no  knowledge  and  does  not  know  that  he  knows  not.  Leave 
him  alone.  Ibn  Mobarak  said:  A  man  is  learned  till  he  searches  for 
knowledge.  When  he  thinks  that  he  has  knowledge,  he  becomes 
ignorant.  Hazrat  Hasan  said:  Death  of  the  heart  is  the 
punishment  of  a  learned  man.  The  death  of  the  heart  is  search  of 
the  world  with  the  actions  of  the  hereafter.  A  poet  said: 

"Woe  to  one  who  buys  misguidance 

in  lieu  of  guidance; 

"Woe  more  to  one  who  buys  the  world 

in  lieu  of  the  hereafter; 

woe  still  more  to  one  who  fosters  irreligion 

in  lieu  of  religion." 


64  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

The  Propnet  said  regarding  a  wicked  learned  man:  Some 
learned  men  will  suffer  such  intense  agonies  of  torture  that  the 
inmates  of  Hell  will  seek  refuge  on  seeing  their  tortures.  They  are 
the  wicked  learned  men.  The  Prophet  said:  On  the  resurrection 
day,  a  learned  man  will  be  brought  and  will  be  thrown  into  Hell. 
His  bowels  will  gush  forth  and  he  will  roam  with  his  bowels  as  a 
donkey  moves  round  a  mill-stone.  The  inmates  of  Hell  will  move 
along  with  him  and  ask:  What  is  the  matter  with  you?  He  will 
reply:  I  used  to  enjoin  the  people  to  do  good  but  I  was  not  myself 
accustomed  to  do  it.  I  used  to  prohibit  them  evil  but  I  myself  used 
to  do  it.  God  says:  The  hypocrites  will  remain  in  the  lowest  abyss 
of  Hell  (4 :  144)  as  they  refused  to  accept  truth  after  they  acquired 
knowledge. 

There  is  a  story  of  Bal'am-b-Baura  about  whom  the  Quran 
says:  Narrate  to  them  the  story  of  one  to  whom  I  revealed  My 
signs.  He  rejected  them.  So  the  devil  followed  him  and  he  became 
one  of  those  who  were  misguided.  He  is  therefore  like  a  dog  which 
lolls  out  its  tongue  whether  you  chase  it  or  leave  it  alone  -  7 :  175. 
This  has  been  said  about  the  wicked  learned  man.  Bal'am  also  got 
God's  book  but  he  kept  himself  busy  in  worldly  affairs  and  was 
therefore  likened  to  a  dog.  Jesus  Christ  said:  The  wicked  learned 
man  is  like  a  rock  which  has  fallen  into  the  source  of  a  stream.  It 
neighter  absolves  any  water  itself,  nor  permits  it  to  flow  out  and 
reach  the  plants.  The  wicked  learned  man  is  also  like  pipes  which 
come  out  of  a  garden  full  of  stenchy  smell  as  it  has  got  graves  of 
dead  men.  Its  outer  part  is  cultivated  but  its  inner  part  is  full  of 
dead  men's  bones. 

These  traditions  and  historical  narratives  show  that  the 
learned  man  who  is  given  to  lust  and  worldly  love  will  be 
disgraced  and  put  to  endless  tortures  and  one  who  is  a  learned 
man  of  the  hereafter  will  get  sal  vatic  n  and  gain  nearness  of  God. 

SIGNS  OF  THE  LEARNED  MAN 
OF  THE  HEREAFTER 

There  are  many  signs  of  the  learned  man  of  the  hereafter.  (1) 
He  does  not  seek  the  world  by  his  learning  He  considers  the 
world  as  insignificant  and  the  hereafter  as  great  and  ever-lasting. 
He  considers  this  world  and  the  next  world  as  diametrically 
opposed  to  each  other  like  two  hostile  friends  of  a  man,  or  like 
two  co-  wives.  If  one  friend  or  co-wife  is  pleased,  the  other  friend 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  65 

or  co-wife  becomes  displeased.  The  two  worlds  are  like  two 
scales  of  a  balance,  the  lower  the  one  falls,  the  other  rises  up 
higher.  Or  they  are  like  the  east  and  the  west.  The  more  one 
advances  towards  the  east,  the  more  he  goes  distant  from  the 
west.  Or  the  two  worlds  are  like  two  pitchers,  one  is  full  and 
another  empty.  The  more  you  pour  water  from  the  full  pitcher 
into  the  empty  one,  the  more  the  full  pitcher  will  become  less  and 
the  empty  one  more  in  water.  There  is  defect  in  the  intellect  of  a 
man  who  has  not  come  to  know  that  the  happiness  of  this  world 
will  soon  pass  away,  as  this  matter  has  been  established  as  true 
by  veritable  sights  and  experiences.  He  who  does  not  recognise 
the  grave  nature  and  stability  of  the  next  world  is  an  unbeliever 
bereft  of  faith.  He  who  does  not  consider  this  world  and  the  next 
world  as  opposed  to  each  other  does  not  know  the  religion  of  the 
Prophets  and  does  not  believe  the  Quran  from  first  to  last.  Such  a 
learned  man  is  not  included  within  the  category  of  the  learned 
men  of  the  hereafter,  he  who  knows  these  things  but  does  not 
love  the  next  world  more  than  this  world  is  in  the  hand  of  the 
devil. 

God  said  in  the  scripture  of  David:  If  any  learned  man  loves 
his  passion  more  than  his  love  for  Myself,  My  treatment  with  him 
is  that  I  deprive  him  of  the  pleasure  of  communion  with  Me.  O 
David,  don't  take  the  message  of  God  to  such  a  learned  man.  The 
world  captivated  him  and  he  will  turn  you  from  My  love.  Such  a 
man  is  a  robber  in  the  pathway  of  My  servants.  When  you  see 
such  a  man  who  searches  Me,  he  is  a  true  servant.  O  David,  I 
write  one  as  a  man  of  sound  judgement  who  flees  towards  Me.  I 
will  never  punish  such  a  person.'  For  this  reason,  Hasan  Basari 
said:  Death  of  the  heart  is  the  punishment  of  a  learned  man  and 
death  of  the  heart  means  search  of  this  world  in  exchange  of  the 
actions  of  the  next  world.  Hazrat  Ihya-b-Muaz  said:  When  the 
world  is  sought  by  learning  and  wisdom,*  his  light  goes 
gradually.  Hazrat  Sayeed-b-  Musayyeb  said:  When  you  see  a 
learned  man  frequenting  the  houses  of  rulers,  he  is  a  robber. 
Hazrat  Omar  said:  When  you  see  a  learned  man  addicted  to  this 
world,  disregard  him  for  the  sake  of  your  religion,  because  every 
learned  man  is  addicted  to  his  object  of  love. 

The  saint  Sahal  Tastari  said:  Every  branch  of  learning  is 
worldly  except  the  learning  of  religion  which,  if  put  into  practice, 
is  next  worldly.  Every  action  without  sincerity  is  fruitless.  He 


66  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

also  said;  All  are  dead  except  the  learned.  All  learned  men  are  in  a 
state  of  stupefaction  except  those  who  translate  their  learning 
into  practice.  All  the  learned  men  who  translate  their  learning 
into  practice  are  in  error  except  those  who  are  sincere.  Those 
learned  men  who  are  sincere  are  in  fear  till  they  come  to  know 
their  ultimate  good  end.  Jesus  Christ  said:  How  can  a  man  be 
counted  as  a  learned  man  who  persists  in  the  pathways  of  this 
world  although  his  journey  is  towards  the  next  world?  The 
Prophet  said:  He  who  searches  learning  in  which  there  is 
pleasure  of  God  but  by  which  he  seeks  worldly  honour  will  not 
get  fragrance  of  paradise  on  the  Resurrection  day.'  God  says  of 
the  dishonest  learned  men:  They  devour  this  world  in  lieu  of 
learning.  He  described  the  learned  men  of  the  hereafter  as 
God-fearing  and  given  to  asceticism.  God  says  regarding  the 
learned  men  of  the  world:  God  took  oath  from  the  People  of  the 
Book  that  they  would  disclose  it  to  the  people  and  would  not 
conceal  it,  but  they  threw  it  behind  their  backs  and  sold  it  for  a 
small  price  -  3  :  184.  God  says  regarding  the  learned  men  of  the 
next  word:  There  are  such  men  among  the  People  of  the  Book 
who  believe  in  what  was  revealed  to  them  and  what  has  been 
revealed  to  you.  They  don't  sell  the  verses  of  God  for  a  small 
price.  Their  reward  is  near  their  Lord  -  3 :  198. 

The  Prophet  said:  God  sent  revelation  to  a  people:  Those 
who  learn  jurisprudence  for  an  object  other  than  that  of  religion" 
and  those  who  search  the  world  with  the  actions  of  the  next 
world  are  like  those  who  wear  the  dress  of  goat's  skin  before  the 
people  but  whose  hearts  are  like  the  raving  wolves.  Their 
tongues  are  sweeter  than  honey  but  their  hearts  are  more  bitter 
than  colocynth.  They  deceive  Me  and  scorn  Me.  I  will  create  such 
a  calamity  for  them  which  will  perplex  even  the  patient.  The 
Prophet  said:  The  learned  men  of  my  followers  are  of  two  kinds. 
God  gives  to  one  kind  learning  which  they  distribute  among  the 
people  and  for  which  they  do  not  covet  anything  and  they  do  not 
sell  it  for  a  small  price.  The  birds  in  the  horizon,  the  fishes  in 
water,  all  the  animals  in  the  world,  and  the  honourable  scribes 
invoke  blessings  for  them.  They  will  come  to  God  being 
honoured  on  the  resurrection  day  and  they  Will  even  get  the 
company  of  the  Prophets. 

God  gives  learning  to  another  kind  of  men  but  they  are  miser 
to  distribute  it  to  the  people.  They  take  wealth  in  its  exchange  and 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  67 

sell  it  for  a  small  price.  Such  people  will  be  brought  on  the 
resurrection  day  with  bridles  of  fire  and  they  will  raise  up  shrieks 
before  all  the  creatures.  It  will  be  proclaimed:  They  are  children 
of  so  and  so.  God  gave  them  learning  but  they  were  miser  in 
distributing  it  to  the  people  and  took  small  price  in  lieu  thereof 
and  property  in  exchange.  Thus  they  will  be  punished  till  God 
finishes  the  judgment  of  account. 

A  more  severe  punishment  will  be  meted  out  to  the  following 
kind  of  people.  A  certain  man  was  a  servant  of  Prophet  Moses.  He 
went  round  saying:  Moses,  the  chosen  man  of  God  told  me  this. 
Moses,  the  confident  of  God,  told  me  this.  Moses,  the  intimate 
friend  of  God,  told  me  this.  Saying  these,  he  became  rich  and  then 
disappeared.  Moses  searched  for  him  but  his  whereabouts  were 
not  found.  Sometime  after,  a  man  came  to  Moses  with  a  pig  with  a 
rope  tied  to  its  neck.  Moses  said  to  him:  Do  you  know  such  and 
such  a  person?  He  said:  Yes,  he  is  this  pig.  Moses  said  to  hinv  O  - 
Lord,  turn  him  into  his  former  position.  I  shall  ask  him  about  his 
condition.  God  revealed  to  him.  If  you  remember  Me  with  what 
Adam  and  his  successors  remembered  Me,  I  shall  not  accept  your 
invocation.  I  shall  inform  you  how  he  was  changed  to  this 
condition.  He  searched  for  the  world  in  lieu  of  religion. 

A  more  severe  narration  was  reported  by  Muaz-b-Jabal  to  the 
effect  that  the  Prophet  had  said:  'One  danger  of  a  learned  man  is 
that  he  would  prefer  talking  than  hearing,  as  there  is 
ornamentation  and  exaggeration  in  his  speech.  A  speaker  is  not 
free  from  these  faults  but  there  is  safety  and  wisdom  in  silence. 
There  is  such  a  man  among  the  learned  who  guards  his  learning 
but  does  not  like  to  communicate  it  to  others.  Such  a  learned  man 
is  in  the  first  stage  of  Hell.  There  is  such  a  man  among  the  learned 
who  is  like  a  king  in  learning.  In  other  words,  if  any  objection  is 
raised  against  learning,  he  becomes  angry.  He  is  in  the  second 
stage  of  Hell.  There  is  such  a  man  among  the  learned  who 
broadcasts  his  learning  and  narrates  traditions  to  the  rich  and  not 
to  those  who  are  in  need  of  them.  Such  a  learned  man  is  in  the 
third  stage  of  Hell.  There  is  such  a  man  among  the  learned  who 
remains  busy  with  legal  decisions  and  commits  mistakes  and 
remains  satisfied  with  one  who  does  divine  service.  Such  a 
learned  man  is  in  the  fourth  stage  of  Hell.  There  is  such  a  man 
among  the  learned  who  delivers  lectures  quoting  the  sayings  of 
the  Jews  and  Christians  to  show  his  learning.  Such  a  learned  man 


68  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

is  in  the  fifth  stage  of  Hell.  There  is  such  a  man  among  the  learned 
who  delivers  lectures  with  pride  and  self  conceit  and  considers 
his  speech  as  good  and  when  any  other  man  delivers  lectures,  he 
sneers  at  him.  Such  a  learned  man  is  in  the  seventh  stage  of  Hell. 

There  is  in  Hadis:  If  a  man  is  praised  so  much  that  it  fills  up 
what  is  between  the  east  and  the  west,  it  is  not  valuable  to  God  , 
even  like  the  wing  of  a  mosquito.  The  Prophet  said:  Don't  sit  with 
every  learned  man.  Sit  with  the  learned  man  who  calls  towards 
five  matters  towards  faith  from  doubt,  sincerity  from  show, 
modesty  from  pride,  love  from  enmity,  and  asceticisn  from 
worldliness. 

(2)  SECOND  SIGNS:  The  second  sign  of  the  learned  man  of 
the  next  world  is  that  his  words  and  actions  are  the  same,  rather 
he  does  not  order  an  action  to  be  done  without  first  doing  it 
himself.  God  says:  Will  you  enjoin  the  people  to  do  good  deeds 
but  forget  them  for  yourselves  -  2  :  41?  God  says:  It  is  a  hateful 
thing  to  God  that  you  say  what  you  do  not  do  -  61 : 3.  God  says  in 
the  story  of  Shuaib:  I  don't  wish  to  do  anything  which  I  myself 
forbid  you  -  9  :  90.  God  says:  Fear  God  and  He  will  give  you 
knowledge  -  2 :  282.  God  says:  Fear  God  and  you  will  know  -  2 :  190. 
God  says:  Fear  God  and  listen  -5:11.  God  said  to  Jesus  Christ:  O 
son  of  Mary,  take  lessons  to  yourself  and  then  give  admonition  to 
others,  otherwise  you  will  be  ashamed  of  Me.  The  Prophet  said:  I 
passed  by  a  party  of  men  in  the  night  of  my  ascension  to  heaven. 
Their  tongues  were  being  cut  with  scissors.  I  asked  them:  Who 
are  you?  They  said:  We  used  to  give  advice  to  others  for  good 
deeds  but  we  used  not  to  do  them.  We  used  to  prohibit  evil  deeds 
to  others,  but  we  used  to  do  them. 

The  Prophet  said:  The  corrupt  learned  men  and  illiterate 
worshipers  will  be  the  cause  of  destruction  of  my  people.  The 
Prophet  Once  came  to  his  companions  and  said:  Take  to  learning 
as  far  as  possible,  but  God  will  not  give  its  rewards  till  you 
translate  it  into  action.  Jesus  Christ  said:  He  who  teaches  good 
but  does  not  translate  it  into  action  is  like  a  woman  who  commits 
fornication  in  secret  and  becomes  pregnant  but  when  her 
pregnancy  is  exposed,  she  becomes  repentant.  God  will  disgrace 
one  before  all  people  on  the  Resurrection  Day  who  does  not  act 
according  to  his  learning.  Hazrat  Muaz  said:  Beware  of  the 
learned  man's  error,  because  he  is  the  most  honoured  one  among 
the  people  and  because  the  people  follow  his  error.  Hazrat  Omar 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  69 

said:  Three  things  will  cause  the  end  of  time.  One  of  them  is  the 
error  of  the  learned  men.  Hazrat  Ibn  Mas'ud  said:  Soon  there  will 
come  a  time  over  the  people  when  sweetness  of  heart  will  vanish. 
At  that  time  neither  the  teachers,  nor  the  taught  will  get  any 
benefit  from  learning.  The  hearts  of  the  learned  will  be  hard  like  a 
hard  stone.  Rains  will  fall  on  it  from  the  sky  but  it  will  slip  away 
therefrom.  The  reason  is  that  the  hearts  of  the  learned  will  be 
addicted  to  the  love  of  this  world  in  preference  to  that  of  the  next 
'  world.  God  will  then  rob  them  of  the  fountain  of  wisdom  and 
extinguish  the  light  of  guidance  from  their  hearts.  They  will  say 
to  you  by  their  tongue  'Fear  God'  but  sin  will  be  exposed  in  their 
actions.  Tongue  will  then  become  dry  and  heart  hard.  The  only 
reason  is  that  the  teachers  will  teach  except  for  the  sake  of  God 
and  the  students  will  learn  except  for  the  sake  of  God.  There  is 
written  in  the  Torah  and  Bible:  Don't  search  for  learning  which 
you  do  not  know  till  you  do  what  you  know.  Hazrat  Huzaifa  said: 
You  are  now  in  an  age  wherein  if  you  gi  ve  up  one  tenth  of  what  you 
know,  you  will  perish,  but  there  will  soon  come  an  age  wherein  if  a 
man  does  one-tenth  of  what  he  knows  will  get  salvation. 

The  simile  of  the  learned  man  is  that  of  a  judge.  The  Prophet 
said:  Judges  are  of  three  classes.  One  class  of  judges  judge  with 
justice  and  with  knowledge  of  truth  and  they  will  go  to  Paradise. 
Another  class  of  judges  judge  unjustly  with  or  without 
knowledge  of  truth  and  they  will  go  to  Hell.  Another  class  of 
judges  judge  contrary  to  the  laws  of  God  and  they  will  go  to  Hell. 
The  Prophet  said:  The  devil  sometimes  will  prevail  over  you  on 
account  of  knowledge.  It  was  questioned:  O  Prophet  of  God,  how 
will  it  happen?  He  said:  The  devil  will  say:  Search  for  knowledge 
but  don't  put  it  into  practice  till  you  acquire  it.  So  he  will  remain 
busy  with  acquisition  of  knowledge  but  will  remain  without 
action  up  to  his  death  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  he  will  have  no 
action.  Hazrat  Ibn  Mas'ud  said:  The  Quran  was  revealed  in  order 
that  men  may  direct  their  lives  according  to  its  teachings.  Direct 
your  life  according  as  you  read  it.  There  will  soon  appear  such 
men  who  will  keep  it  like  an  arrow  and  they  are  not  good  among 
you.  The  learned  man  who  does  not  act  up  to  his  knowledge  is 
like  a  patient  who  describes  the  qualities  of  a  medicine  without 
using  it  or  like  a  hungry  man  who  describes  the  taste  of  a  food 
without  eating  it.  God  said:  Woe  unto  you  for  what  you  utter.  The 
Prophet  said:  What  I  fear  most  for  my  followers  is  the  errors  of 
the  learned  and  the  arguments  of  the  hypocrites  about  the  Quran. 


70  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

(3)  THIRD  SIGN:  Another  sign  of  the  learned  man  of  the 
next  world  is  that  his  mind  would  be  directed  towards  such 
learnings  as  will  be  useful  for  the  next  world  and  give 
encouragement  to  pious  deeds.  He  will  avoid  those  learnings 
which  will  bring  lesser  benefit  and  wherein  there  are  much 
arguments.  He  who  shuns  the  learning  of  practice  and  remains 
busy  in  arguments  is  like  a  sick  man  who  suffers  from  many 
diseases,  but  when  he  fears  death,  he  goes  to  an  experienced 
physician  and  asks  him  many  questions  of  the  qualities  of  drugs 
and  complexities  of  medical  profession  but  he  does  not  ask  him 
about  his  diseases.  This  is  the  height  of  foolishness. 

On  day  a  man  came  to  the  Apostle  of  God  and  said:  Teach  me 
some  of  the  strange  things  of  knowledge.  He  asked  him  What 
have  you  done  with  the  beginning  of  knowledge?  The  man  said: 
What  is  the  beginning  of  knowledge?  The  Prophet  replied:  Have 
you  known  God?  He  said:  Yes,  He  asked:  What  have  you  learnt 
about  this  tnith?  He  said:  What  God  willed.  The  Prophet  said: 
Have  you  known  death?  He  said:  Yes,  He  said:  How  have  you 
prepared  for  it?  He  said:  What  God  willed.  The  Prophet  said:  Go 
and  gain  experience  of  these  things  first  and  then  I  shall  teach 
you  some  of  the  strange  things  of  knowledge. 

A  student  should  be  like  Hazrat  Hatem  Asem  who  was  the 
disciple  of  Hazrat  Shaqiq  Balakhi.  He  once  asked  Hatem:  How 
long  are  you  in  my  company?  Hatem  said:  For  the  last  33  years. 
He  said:  What  have  you  learnt  from  me  during  this  period? 
Hatem  said:  I  have  learnt  only  eight  things.  Shaqiq  said:  You 
have  not  learnt  except  eight  things!  He  said:  Yes,  O  dear  teacher,  I 
have  learnt  nothing  except  eight  things.  I  don't  wish  to  speak 
falsehood.  He  said:  Describe  those  eight  things  to  me.  Let  me  hear 
them.  Hatem  began  to  describe  them. 

First,  1  looked  around  and  beheld  that  every  man  has  got  an 
object  of  love  and  he  lives  with  that  thing  until  his  death.  When 
he  goes  to  the  grave,  it  becomes  separate  from  him.  I  pondered 
over  the  following  words  of  God  "We  are  for  God  and  to  Him  we 
shall  return."  So  I  have  made  good  deeds  as  my  object  of  love. 
When  I  will  go  to  the  grave,  my  good  deeds  will  accompany  me  to 
the  grave.  The  sage  Shaqiq  said:  O  Hatem,  you  have  done  well. 

Secondly,  I  have  pondered  over  the  following  words  of  God 
"As  for  one  whp  fears  the  majesty  of  his  Lord  and  refrains  his  soul 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  71 

\ 

E 

jj  from  lust,  paradise  is  his  resting  place  -  79  :  40  Q.  I  have  come  to 

know  that  the  words  of  God  are  true.  I  have  tried  rny  utmost  to 

i  suppress  my  lust  and  remained  satisfied  with  obeying  the 

injunctions  of  God. 

Third,  I  looked  around  the  people  and  found  that  everyone 
values  what  he  possesses.  Then  I  turned  to  the  following  words 
of  God:  What  is  with  you  will  end  and  what  is  with  God  will  last  - 
16:98  Q.  Then  I  began  to  give  unto  God  whatever  valuable  things 
fell  into  my  hands. 

Fourth,  I  looked  around  and  saw  that  everyone  puts  his  trust 
in  his  wealth  and  properties,  his  name  and  fame  and  his  honour 
and  glory  and  found  that  there  is  nothing  in  them.  Then  I  looked 
towards  the  following  words  of  God  The  most  honourable  of 
you  to  God  is  one  who  is  the  most  God-fearing  among  you'  -  49  :' 
13Q.  Then  I  intended  to  accept  God-fear  in  my  life  till  I  am 
honoured  by  God. 

Fifth,  I  looked  around  the  people  and  found  them  slandering 
and  cursing  one  another  because  of  envy  and  hatred  and  then  I 
looked  towards  the  words  of  God:  It  is  I  who  distributed  their 
subsistence  among  them  in  this  world's  life  -  43  :  31  Q.  So  I  gave 
up  envy  and  hatred  and' realised  that  subsistence  comes  from 
God  and  then  I  disliked  the  people  no  more. 

Sixth,  T  looked  to  the  people  and  found  them  ungrateful  to 
one  another  and  even  some  of  them  kill  others  and  then  I  looked 
towards  the  following  word  of  God:  The  devil  is  your  foe  and  so 
take  him  as  foe  -  35  : 6  Q.  So  I  took  the  devil  as  a  foe  and  ceased  to 
have  enmity  with  the  people. 

Seventh,  I  turned  to  the  people  and  found  everyone  seeking 
his  livelihood  and  for  that  debasing  himself  and  committing 
unlawful  things  and  then  I  looked  towards  the  following  words 
of  God:  There  is  no  animal  in  the  earth  of  which  the  provision  is 
not  upon  God  -  11  :  8Q.  Finding  that  I  am  one  of  the  animals 
whose  provision  is  upon  God,  I  turned  towards  the  duties 
prescribed  by  God  and  entrusted  my  fate  unto  Him. 

Eighth,  I  turned  to  the  people  and  found  that  everyone 
placed  his  trust  in  something  created,  some  in  his  wealth,  some  in 
his  profession,  some  in  his  industry  and  some  in  the  health  of  his 
body  and  then  looked  towards  the  following  words  of  God:  If  a 


72  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

man  relies  on  God,  He  is  sufficient  for  him  -  65 :  3Q.  Then  I  relied 
on  God  and  He  is  sufficient  for  me. 

On  hearing  Hatem,  Hazrat  Shadiq  exclaimed;  Hatem,  may 
God  prosper  you.  I  examined  the  Torah,  the  Bible,  the  Jabur 
(Psalms)  and  the  great  Quran  and  found  that  all  these  centre 
round  these  eight  things  and  he  who  puts  them  into  practice 
follows  these  four  books. 

In  short,  the  learned  men  of  the  hereafter  seek  and  acquire 
knowledge  but  the  learned  men  of  the  world  are  engaged  in 
acquiring  wealth  and  name  and  fame  and  give  up  those  learnings 
for  which  God  sent  the  Prophets. 

(4)  FOURTH  SIGNS:  Another  sign  of  the  learned  man  of  the 
next  world  is  that  he  has  got  no  attraction  for  various  kinds  of 
foods  and  drinks,  luxury  in  dresses,  furnitures  and  houses,  but 
rather  he  adopts  moderate  course  in  all  these  things  following 
the  earlier  sages  and  he  is  best  satisfied  with  the  least  of 
everything.  The  less  is  a  man  attracted  towards  luxuries,  the 
more  he  will  be  close  to  God  and  the  more  he  will  be  in 
association  of  the  learned  men  of  the  hereafter  and  in  rank. 

Abdullah-b-Khawas  used  to  keep  company  with  Hazrat 
Hatem  Asem  and  he  said:  Once  I  with  320  pilgrims  went  to  Rayy 
along  with  the  sage  Hatem  Asem.  We  had  food  stuffs  with  us  and 
not  food.  We  went  to  a  merchant  who  was  well  known  for  love  of 
the  poor.  We  became  his  guests  that  night.  He  said  next  day  to  the 
sage  Hatem:  Have  you  got  any  necessity  with  me?  I  wish  now  to 
go  to  see  an  ailing  theologian.  Hatem  said:  "Visiting  the  sick  is  no 
doubt  meritorious  but  looking  after  the  poor  is  worship.  I  will  go 
along  with  you.  The  sick  man  was  Muhammad-b-Maqatil,  judge 
of  Rayy.  When  we  came  near  his  gate,  we  looked  at  his  lofty  and 
beautiful  palace.  Hatem  thought  for  a  moment  and  then  said:  Is 
this  the  condition  of  the  house  of  a  learned  man?  After 
permission,  we  entered  the  house  and  found  it  very  beautiful  and 
spcious  with  carpets  spread  all  over  the  floor  and  screens  of 
varied  colours  hanging.  The  judge  lay  down  on  a  oft  mattress  and 
a  servant  was  standing  with  a  fan  near  his  head.  The  merchant 
asked  about  his  health  but  Hatem  stood  silent.  Being  requested  to 
sit,  he  did  not  sit  but  asked  the  judge:  From  whom  have  you  got 
your  learning?  He  said:  From  the  companions  of  the  Apostle  of 
God.  He  asked  him:  From  whom  did  the  companions  learn?  He 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  73 

said:  From  the  Apostle  of  God,  He  asked:  From  whom  did  the 
Apostle  of  God  learn?  He  said:  From  Gebriel  and  he  learnt  from 
God.  Ha  tern  asked:  Have  you  found  in  their  learnings  that  to  God 
the  rank  of  a  man  whose  palace  is  high  and  spacious  is  grater?  He 
said:  No.  He  asked:  What  then  have  you  found?  The  judge  said:  I 
found  therein  that  a  man  who  renunciates  the  world,  turns  his 
attention  towards  the  next  world,  loves  the  poor  and  proceeds 
towards  the  hereafter  has  got  a  great  rank  near  God.  Ha  tern  said 
to  the  judge:  Whom  have  you  followed,  prophets  or  their 
companions,  or  the  pious  men,  or  Pharaoh  and  Namrud  who 
erected  lofty  buildings  with  bricks?  The  dishonest  learned  men 
like  you  are  fools.  Then  he  went  away  from  that  place. 

Ibn  Maqatil's  sickness  became  thereafter  acute  and  the 
inhabitants  of  Rayy  came  to  know  what  passed  between  him  and 
Hatem.  They  said  to  Ha  tern:  The  palace  of  Tanafusi  and  Qazawin 
is  more  lofty  and  spacious.  Hatem  went  there  on  his  own  accord 
and  said  to  Tanafusi:  May  God  have  mercy  on  you!  I  am  a 
foreigner  and  I  wish  that  you  should  teach  me  the  elements  of  my 
religion  and  the  particulars  of  ablution.  Tanafusi  said:  Yes,  O  lad, 
bring  a  pot  of  water,  when  it  was  brought,  Tanafusi  made 
ablution  and  washed  each  limb  thrice  and  said:  This  is  thus 
Hatem  said:  I  am  making  ablution  in  your  presence.  Then  he 
began  to  wash  each  limb  four  times.  Tanafusi  said:  O  Shaikh,  you 
have  been  extravagant  and  washed  your  hands  four  times. 
Hatem  said:  O  glorious  God,  i  have  been  extravagant  for  washing 
my  hands  four  times,  but  you  do  not  consider  yourself  extravagant 
for  what  you  are  in  all  these  luxuries.  Tanafusi  then  came  to  know 
that  he  had  no  necessity  of  learning  from  him  ablution.  Thereafter 
he  did  not  come  out  to  the  people  for  forty  days. 

Hatem  once  went  to  Bagdad  and  there  Imam  Ahmad  went  to 
see  him  and  asked  him:  What  will  ensure  salvation  from  the 
world?  Hatem  said:  You  are  not  safe  in  this  world  unless  you 
possess  four  characteristics  -  (1)  overlook  the  ignorance  of  man, 
(2)  conceal  your  ignorance  from  them,  (3)  seek  their  good  and  (4) 
don't  seek  anything  from  them. 

When  the  sage  Hatem  went  to  Madina,  some  of  its 
inhabitants  went  to  him  and  he  asked  them:  O  people,  what  is  the 
name  of  this  city?  They  said:  It  is  the  city  of  the  Prophet  of  God. 
He  asked:  Where  is  the  palace  of  the  Prophet  of  God?  I  shall 
observe  my  prayer  therein.  They  said:  He  had  no  palace  except  a 


74  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

small  cottage  wherein  he  rested.  He  asked:  Where  are  the  palaces 
of  his  companions?  They  said:  They  had  no  palaces.  They  had 
only  cottages  in  this  world  for  rest.  Hatem  said:  O  people,  this 
city  then  is  the  city  of  Pharaoh.  They  brought  him  before  the 
Governor  and  said:  This  man  is  a  foreigner  and  says  that  this  is 
the  city  of  Pharaoh.  The  governor  asked  him:  Why  do  you  utter 
this?  Hatem  said:  Don't  be  hasty  in  judgment  upon  me.  I  am  a 
foreigner.  Then  he  narrated  the  whole  conversation  between  him 
and  some  Medinites.  Then  he  said:  God  said:  You  will  find  in  the 
Prophet  of  God  an  excellent  example  -  33  :  21  Q.  Whose  example 
have  you  adopted,  example  -  33 ;  21  Q.  Whose  example  have  you 
adopted,  example  of  the  Prophet  or  of  Pharaoh?  They  then  left 
him.  These  are  the  stories  of  Hatem  Asem. 

In  short,  use  of  ornamentation  in  permissible  things  is  not 
unlawful  but  it  creates  fondness  for  these  and  to  give  them  up 
at  the  end  becomes  difficult.  The  Prophet  did  not  lay  stress  for 
renunciation  of  the  world.  It  has  been  narrated  that  Caliph 
Yahya-b-Syeed  once  wrote  to  Imam  Malek-b-Anas  saying:  In 
the  name  of  God,  the  Most  Merciful,  the  Most  Compassionate 
and  blessings  on  Prophet  Muhammad.  From  Yahya-b-Sayeed 
to  Malek-b-Anas:  I  have  been  informed  that  you  put  on  fine 
cloths,  eat  delicious  food,  sleep  on  soft  couches  and  keep  a 
door-keeper  at  your  door.  You  sit  in  the  assembly  of  learning 
and  people  come  to  you  from  distant  places.  They  have  taken 
you  as  Imam  and  they  are  satisfied  with  your  words.  O  Malek, 
fear  God,  take  to  humility.  I  write  to  you  this  letter  as  an 
admonition,.  None  has  seen  its  contents  except  God.  Imam 
Malek  wrote  back  saying:  I  have  received  your  letter  and  it  has 
come  to  me  as  an  admonition,  kindness  and  a  sign  to  good 
conduct.  May  God  bless  your  piety  and  reward  you  for  your 
advice.  I  seek  His  help.  There  is  no  power  and  might  except  by 
His  help.  We  do  what  you  have  mentioned  but  beg  forgiveness 
of  God  for  them.  God  said:  Who  has  made  unlawful  the 
fineries  of  God  which  God  has  gifted  to  His  servants  and  clean 
and  pure  foods  -  7  :  32Q?  I  know  certainly  that  abstinence  from 
these  things  is  better  than  indulging  in  them.  Don't  give  up 
writing  to  me.  Peace  be  on  you."  See  then  the  sense  of  justice 
which  Imam  Malek  showed.  He  did  not  make  the  fineries  of 
the  world  unlawful  but  admitted  that  abstinence  from  luxuries 
is  better. 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  75 

(5)  FIFTH  SIGN:  Another  sign  of  the  learned  man  of  the 
hereafter  is  that  he  keeps  himself  distant  from  the  ruling 
authorities  arfd  avoids  their  company,  because  this  world  is 
sweet,  ever-new  and  its  bridle  is  in  their  hands.  He  who  comes 
near  them  is  not  free  from  their  pleasures  and  harms.  They  are 
mostly  unjust  and  do  not  obey  the  advices  of  the  learned  men. 
The  learned  man  who  frequents  them  will  look  to  their  grandeurs 
and  then  think  God's  gift  upon  him  as  insignificant.  To  keep 
company  with  the  rulers  is  the  key  to  evils.  The  Prophet  said:  He 
who  lives  in  desert  becomes  hard-hearted,  he  who  follows  them 
becomes  unmindful  and  he  who  frequents  the  rulers  falls  into 
danger.  He  said  also:  Soon  you  will  have  rulers  to  whom  you  will 
bear  allegiance  or  not.  He  who  rejects  his  allegiance  to  them  will 
be  save  and  he  who  hates  them  will  be  safe  but  God  will  keep  him 
distant  who  remains  satisfied  with  them  and  follows  them.  He 
was  asked:  Shall  we  figh't  with  them?  The  Prophet  said:  No,  till 
they  pray. 

Hazrat  Huzaifa  said:  Be  careful  of  the  place  of  danger.  He 
was  asked:  What  is  it?  He  said:  The  palaces  of  the  rulers.  Some 
one  of  you  will  go  to  a  ruler,  approve  his  lies  and  say  that  he 
possesses  an  attribute  which  he  does  not  actually  possess.  The 
Prophet  said:  The  learned  are  the  representatives  of  the  Prophets 
to  the  people  till  they  do  not  mix  with  the  rulers.  When  they  mix, 
they  commit  treachery  with  the  Prophets.  So  beware  of  them  and 
don't  mix  with  them.  Hazrat  Sayed-b-Musayyeb  said:  When  you 
see  a  learned  man  frequenting  the  house  of  a  ruler,  beware  of  his 
company  as  he  is  a  thief.  Hazrat  Aozayi  said:  There  is  nothing 
more  hateful  to  God  than  a  learned  man  who  frequents  the  house 
of  a  ruler.  The  Prophet  said:  The  learned  men  who  frequent  the 
houses  of  rulers  are  worst  and  the  rulers  who  frequent  the  houses 
of  the  learned  men  are  best.  Hazrat  Maqhul  said:  He  who  leams 
the  Quran  and  becomes  expert  in  religious  learning  but  comes  to 
the  company  of  the  rulers  out  of  greed  is  immerged  in  the  sea  of 
Hell  fire.  When  you  see  a  learned  man  loving  the  world,  convert 
him  to  your  religion  because  I  have  learnt  it  by  experience. 

Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  There  lived  before  your  time  a 
man  who  was  born  in  Islam  and  enjoyed  the  company  of  the 
Prophet.  He  is  Sa'ad-b-Abi  Waqas.  He  did  not  frequent  the 
houses  of  rulers  and  hated  it.  His  sons  said  to  him :  Those  who  are 
like  you  in  following  Islam  and  keeping  company  with  the 


76  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

Prophet  frequent  the  houses  of  rulers.  It  would  have  been  better 
if  you  frequnent  their  houses,  He  said :  O  dear  sons,  the  world  is  a 
corpse  and  the  people  surround  it.  By  God,  I  will  not  be  a  partner , 
to  it  even  if  I  am  able  to  do  it.  They  said  :  O  father,  you  will  then 
die  of  starvation.  He  said :  O  sons,  I  would  rather  starve  to  death 
than  die  as  a  great  man  with  hypocrisy.  Hazrat  Hasan  used  to  say 
to  the  opposing  parties  :  By  God,  know  that  earth  will  consume 
the  flesh  and  fat  but  not  faith.  Hazrat  Omar-b-Abdul  Aziz  wrote 
a  letter  to  Hasan  Basari  saying  :  Name  such  persons  to  me  who 
will  help  me  in  enforcing  the  injunctions  of  God.  He  replied  to 
him :  Those  who  are  religious  do  not  wish  to  go  to  you.  You  will 
not  wish  the  company  of  those  who  love  the  world  Keep  the 
noble  in  company  as  they  will  defile  their  honour  by  breach  of 
trust. 

(6)  SIXTH  SIGN.  Another  sign  of  the  learned  man  of  the 
hereafter  is  that  he  does  not  give  Fatwa  or  legal  decision  in  a 
hurry  but  tarries  to  be  relieved  of  it.  When  he  is  asked  about  a 
matter  known  to  him  from  the  Quran,  Hadis,  Ijma  and  Qiyas,  he 
gives  his  opinion,  When  he  has  doubt,  he  says  :  I  don't  know. 
When  he  is  asked  about  a  matter  about  which  he  has  formed  an 
opinion  through  Ijtihad,  independent  interpretation  and 
speculation,  he  is  careful  not  to  commit  himself  but  refer  the 
matte  to  someone  else  who  is  more  capable  than  himself. 
According  to  one  tradition :  There  are  three  roots  of  learning,  the 
express  word  of  the  Quran,  the  lasting  usage  of  the  Prophet  (and 
another  root  is  unknown  to  me-reporter).  The  sage  Shubi  said  :  "I 
don't  know"  is  half  of  learning.  He  who  remains  silent  for  God 
owing  to  his  ignorance  gets  reward  not  less  than  that  of  the  man 
who  does  not  remain  silent,  because  to  confess  one's  ignorance  is 
the  most  difficult  thing.  Such  was  the  condition  of  companions  of 
the  Prophet  and  the  earlier  sages.  When  Ibn  Omar  was  asked  any 
question,  he  would  say :  Go  to  the  ruler,  because  he  has  taken  the 
affairs  of  men.  Hazrat  Ibn  Mas'ud  said :  He  who  gives  opinion  as 
soon  as  a  question  is  put  to  him  is  mad.  He  also  said :  I  don't  know 
is  the  shield  of  a  learned  man.  T^  he  commits  mistakes;  it  would 
amount  to  murder. 

Ibrahim-b-Adam  said:  There  is  nothing  more  formidable  to 
the  devil  than  a  learned  man  who  manifests  his  knowledge  both 
openly  and  salinity.  The  devil  says :  Look  to  this  man.  His  silence 
is  severer  to  me  than  his  speech. 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  77 

Some  wise  man  said:  There  are  Abdals  (worshipers)  in  the 
world  .  Their  meal  ends  when  they  are  still  hungry.  They  sleep 
when  it  overcomes  them.  Their  words  end  only  in  necessary 
talks.  In  other  words,  they  donot  speak  unless  asked  and  they 
remain  silent  when  sufficient  reply  is  obtained  from  others. 
When  compelled,  they  reply.  Ibn  Omar  used  to  say :  Do  you  wish 
to  use  us  as  a  bridge  over  which  you  wish  to  cross  over  to  Hell, 
Abu  Hafs  Nishapuri  said  :  A  learned  man  is  he  who  fears  the  day 
of  questions,  who  fears  that  he  will  be  asked  on  the  Resurrection 
Day  :  Wherefrom  have  you  got  this  answer  :  The  Prohpet  said  :  I 
don't  know  whether  Uzair  was  a  Prophet  or  not,  whether  Tubba 
was  accursed  or  not,  whether  Zul-Qarnain  was  a  Prophet  or  not. 
When  asked  about  the  best  and  worst  places  on  the  earth,  the 
Prophet  said :  I  don't  know.  But  the  Almighty  God  said  to  me  that 
the  best  place  is  mosque  and  the  worst  place  is  market.  When 
Hazrat  Ibn  Omar  was  asked  ten  questions,  he  replied  only  one 
and  not  others,  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  replied  nine  and  did  not  reply 
one.  Someone  said  that  among  the  jurists,  the  greater  number 
were  men  who  used  to  say  we  don't  know  than  the  numbers  who 
who  used  to  say  we  know.  Sufiyan  Saori  said  :  Malek-b-Anas, 
Ahmad-b-Hanbal,  Fuzail,  Bashar  and  others  were  among  the 
former,  Abdur  Rehman-b-  Abi  Laila  said  :  I  met  in  this  mosque 
120  companions  of  the  Prophet  among  whom  there  was  none 
who  when  questioned  to  express  an  opinion  would  not  have 
wished  that  someone  else  would  reply  to  it.  It  is  narrated  that 
when  somebody  presented  something  to  someone  of  Ahle  Suffa, 
he  would  give  it  to  another  who  would  give  it  to  another  and  so 
on,  until  it  finally  came  back  to  the  first  one.  Now  see  what  was 
the  condition  of  the  learned  men  of  that  age  and  what  is  the 
condition  now. 

The  Prophet  said:  Let  not  the  people  seek  legal  decision 
except  from  three  persons,  a  ruler  or  a  person  to  whom  power  is 
delegated  or  a  religious  man.  Some  one  said  :  the  companions 
used  to  refer  to  one  another  about  four  things-Immate 
(leadership),  Wasiat  (legacy),  Amant  (deposit)  and  Fatwa  (legal 
decision).  Someone  said  :  One  who  hurriedly  used  to  give 
opinion  was  a  less  learned  man.  The  activites  of  the  companions 
and  their  followers  were  confined  only  to  four  things,  reading  the 
Quran,building  mosques,  Zikr  of  God  and  enjoining  good  had 
forbiding  evil.  They  heard  the  Prophet  say  :  There  is  no  good  in 
most  of  their  secret  talks  except  only  in.  his  who  enjoins 


78  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

alms-giving  or  what  is  right  or  concord  among  men.  Hazrat  Ibn 
Hussan  said.  Any  question  of  legal  decision,  when  put  to  them, 
used  to  be  placed  before  Hazrat  Omar  who  used  to  call  all  the 
warriors  who  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Badr  for  consulation.  The 
Prophet  said  :  If  you  see  a  man  adopting  silence  and  asceticism, 
take  advice  from  him,  as  he  is  not  free  from  wisdom. 

The  learned  men  are  of  two  kinds,  a  learned  man  for  the 
public  who  is  a  Mufti  or  giver  of  legal  decision  and  a  companion 
of  the  ruler,  and  another  learned  man  for  Tauhid  and  good  deeds 
and  he  resides  in  solitude.  It  is  said  that  such  a  learned  man  was 
Imam  Ahmad-b-Hanbal  who  was  like  the  river  Tigris  and 
everyone  used  to  take  benefit  from  him.  The  sage  Bashr-b-Hares 
was  also  like  him.  He  was  like  a  covered  well  of  fresh  water 
visited  by  a  single  person  at  a  time.  A  wise  man  said :  When  know 
ledge  increases,  loquacity  decreases. 

If  any  question  was  put  to  Hazrat  Abu  Darda'a,  he  used  to 
give  no  reply.  When  Hazrat  Anas  was  asked  anything,  he  used  to 
say  :  Ask  our  leader  Hazrat  Abbas.  When  Hazrat  Abbas  was 
asked,  he  used  to  say  :  Ask  Hares-b-Zaid.  When  Ibn  Omar  was 
asked  anything,  he  used  to  say :  Ask  Sayeed-b-Musayyeb. 

(7)  SEVENTH  SIGN.  The  seventh  sign  of  the  learned  man  of 
the  next  world  is  that  his  main  object  of  anxeity  is  to  learn  secreat 
knowledge,  observation  of  the  heart,  knowledge  of  the  paths  of 
the  hereafter,  to  travel  thereon  and  to  have  abiding  faith  in 
finding  self  mortification  and  obsertion,  because  self 
mortification  leads  to  Mushahadah  or  contemplation  and  lets 
flow  the  fountain  of  wisdom  through  the  intricate  details  of  the 
science  of  heart.  Reading  of  books  and  learning  of  sciences  are 
not  sufficient  for  it.  But  this  wisdom  appears  as  result  of  hard 
labour.  It  opens  if  one  sits  in  loneliness  with  God  with  a  mind 
turned  with  humility  of  spirit  towards  God  and  through 
self-mortification,  observation  and  watching.  This  is  the  key  of 
Ilham  or  inspiration  and  the  fountain  head  of  Kashf  or  secret 
knowledge.  Many  students  who  have  been  learning  for  a  long 
time  could  not  move  more  than  what  they  heard.  There  are  many 
students  who  cut  short  their  education  and  remain  busy  in 
actions  and  observations  of  the  heart.  God  opens  for  them;  the 
niceties  of  wisdom  for  which  the  wisdom  of  the 'wise  becomes 
perplexed.  For  this  reason,  the  Prophet  said  :  If  a  man  acts  • 
according  to  his  learning,  God  gives  him  such  a  knowledge  as 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  79 

was  unknown  to  him.  It  was  also  mentioned  in  one  of  the  books 
of  ancient  ages  :  O  children  of  Israil,  don't  say  that  knowledge  is 
in  heaven.  Who  will  bring  it  down  to  the  earth?  Don't  say  that 
knowledge  is  in  the  lowest  abyss  of  the  earth  ?  Who  will  dig  it 
out?  Don,t  say  that  knowledge  is  far  beyond  the  ocean.  Who  will 
bring  it  after  crossing  it  ? 

Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  knowledge  is  in  your  hearts.  Take 
its  lesson  from  those  who  have  got  knowledge  of  soul  or  heart 
and  make  one's  character  like  that  of  the  Truthful  and  than 
knowledge  will  spring  forth  in  heart  so  much  so  that  it  will 
immerge  him  therein.  Sahal-Tastari  said  :  The  learned  men,  the 
worshipers  and  the  ascetices  departed  from  the  world  with  their 
hearts  locked  up.  They  can  not  be  opened  except  by  the  hearts  of 
the  truthful  and  martyrs.  Then  he  recited  this  verse  of  God  :  To 
him  are  the  keys  of  unseen  thing.  None  knows  them  but  He-6 :  59 . 
Had  it  not  been  for  the  fact  that  the  light  of  the  heart  of  one  who 
has  a  heart  with  inner  light  determines  the  outward  or  esoteric 
knowledge,  the  Prophet  would  not  have  said :  If  they  seek  justice 
to  you  (thrice),  ask  your  heart.  The  Prophet  said  that  God  said :  A 
man  continue  to  come  close  to  Me  with  optional  divine  services 
till  I  love  him.  When  I  love  him,  I  become  his  ears  with  which  he 
hears,  etc.  So  many  are  the  subtle  meanings  of  the  mysteries  of 
the  Quran  that  appear  in  the  hearts  of  those  persons  who  have 
devoted  themselves  to  Zikr  and  maditation  of  God.  It  is  not 
found  in  the  commentaries  and  it  also  did  not  appear  in  the 
hearts  of  the  reputed  commentators,  It  appear  as  a  result  of  the 
meditation  of  a  devotee.  When  its  meaning  is  presented  to  the 
commentators.  They  take  it  as  good  and  realise  that  they  are  the 
news  of  a  pure  soul  and  a  gift  of  God  arising  out  of  sincere 
devotion  and  reflection.  The  condition  of  secret  knowledge,  the 
science  of  practical  religion  and  the  subtleties  of  the  flow  of 
thoughts  of  the  heart  is  similar  Each  of  these  beneficial  learnings 
is  an  ocean  of  which  the  depth  is  beyond  reach.  Each  disciple  gets 
its  clue  in  proportion  to  his  ability  and  good  deeds. 

Hazrat  AH  said  in  the  course  of  a  long  discouse  about  such 
men  :  Hearts  are  like  different  vessels  and  the  best  vessel  is  that 
which  holds  good  things.  Men  are  of  three  kinds,  the  divine 
learned  men,  the  travellers  to  the  path  of  salvation  and  the 
ignorant  people  calling  towards  evils  who  are  swayed  by  every 
passing  wind.  Their  hearts  are  not  illumined  by  the  light  of 


80  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

knowledge  and  stand  not  on  its  firm  foundation.  Knowledge  is 
better  than  wealth.  It  guards  you,  but  you  guard  wealth,  # 
Knowledge  increases  by  expense,  while  wealth  descreases. 
Learning  is  knowledge  by  which  religion  is  learnt  and  by  which 
allegiance  is  obtained  in  your  life  time  and  which  becomes  a  good 
thing  to  be  remembered  after  your  death.  Knowledge  is  a  judge 
and  wealth  seeks  justice.  Along  with  death  the  benefits  of  wealth 
disappear,  but  the  benefits  of  knowledge  remain.  All  people  are 
dead,  but  the  learned  are  alive  and  will  live  as  long  as  time  shall 
last.  Then  taking  a  deep  breath  and  pointing  to  his  breast,  Hazrat 
Ali  said  :  Alas,  here,  is  abandant  knowledge,  but  I  find  none  to 
carry  it,  I  don't  find  any  trusted  seeker  but  I  find  such  men  who 
seek  the  world  with  the  weapon  of  religion  and  attribute  to  the 
friends  of  God  the  gifts  of  God  and  give  prevalence  of  His  proof 
over  His  creations,  make  subdued  the  seekers  of  truth,  but  on  the 
first  onslaught  of  oposition  doubt  arises  in  their  minds.  They  lose 
their  insight  owing  to  their  scepticism  and  keep  themselves  busy 
in  indulgences.  They  amass  wealth  and  hoard  it.  O  God,  thus  will 
knowledge  perish  when  its  people  will  die.  The  world  will  not  be 
free  of  men  who  will  establish  religion  secretly  and  openly  in 
order  that  the  proofs  of  God  are  not  obliterated.  They  will  be  few 
in  number  but  they  will  be  great  in  honour.  They  will  be  lost 
openly,  but  their  pictures  will  reign  in  hearts.  God  will  preserve 
His  religion  through  them.  They  will  leave  the  religion  for  their 
successors  and  will  plant  it  in  the  hearts  of  the  young.  The  Teal 
nature  of  knowledge  ledge  will  be  disclosed  with  their  help.  They 
will  get  good  news  from  the  life  of  sure  faith.  They  will  make  easy 
what  the  rich  think  difficult  and  they  will  make  clear  what  the 
heedless  think  obscure.  They  will  keep  company  with  the  world 
with  their  bodies,  but  their  souls  will  be  kept  hanging  in  lofty  places. 
They  are  servants  of  God  among  His  people,  His  trustees  and 
deputies  on  the  earth.  Then  he  wept  and  said:  How  eagar  I  am  to 
meet  them."  These  are  the  attributes  of  the  learned  men  of  the  next 
world  which  can  be  gained  by  constant  actions  and  sincere  efforts. 

(8)  EIGHT  SIGN:  Another  sign  of  the  learned  man  of  the  next 
world  is  that  he  is  sincere  and  upright  for  making  his  faith  firm 
and  strong  as  firm  faith  is  the  root  of  religion.  The  Prophet  said: 
Sure  faith  is  belief  in  its  entirely  or  perfect  faith.  So  it  is  necessary 
to  learn  the  learning  of  faith,  after  which  the  path  of  the  heart  will 
be  opened.  For  this  reason  the  Prophet  said:  Learn  sure  faith.'  In 
other  words,  keep  company  with  those  who  have  firm  faith,  hear 


i 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  81 

from  them  the  learning  of  sure  faith,  follow  them  always,  so  that 
your  faith  may  become  firm  as  their  faith  became  firm.  A  little 
sure  faith  is  better  than  many  actions.  When  two  persons,  one  of 
whose  sure  faith  was  good  but  whose  sins  more  and  another 
whose  actions  were  more  and  faith  little,  were  mentioned  to  the 
Prophet,  he  said:  There  is  no  man  without  sin.  One  whose 
intellect  is  short  and  faith  sure  cannot  be  injured  by  sin,  because 
whenever  he  commits  sin,  he  repents  and  seeks  forgiveness. 
Thus  his  sins  are  expiated  and  his  virtues  remain  intact  and  he 
enters  paradise.  For  this  reason,  the  Prophet  said:  Among  the 
things  you  have  been  given,  the  least  is  firm  faith  and 
determination  for  patience.  Whoever  is  given  a  special  share  of 
these  two,  has  got  faith  even  if  he  misses  prayer  at  night  and 
fasting  by  day.  Loqman  advised  his  son:  O  dear  son,  action  is  not 
possible  except  through  firm  faith  in  religion.  A  man  cannot  act 
except  in  proportion  to  his  sure  faith  and  his  action  does  not 
decrease  except  when  his  sure  faith  decreases.  Ihya  ibrt  Muaz 
said:  Tauhid  (monotheism)  has  got  light  and  shirk  (polytheism) 
fire.  The  light  of  Tauhid  for  the  sins  of  the  monotheists  is  more 
warm  than  the  fire  of  polytheists  for  their  virtues.  Here  light 
means  sure  faith.  God  referred  to  those  who  have  sure  faith 
several  times  in  the  Quran  and  pointed  out  also  that  through 
faith  they  receive  His  blessings. 

The  reply  to  the  question  -  What  is  meant  by  Yeqin  or  sure  faith 
is  as  follows.  The  philosophers  and  the  scholastic  theologians  say 
that  its  meaning  is  faith  in  objects  beyond  doubt.  There  are  four 
states  of  a  person  when  he  is  eager  to  know  the  truth  of  a  thing. 
Firstly  when  truth  and  falsehood  are  equal  in  the  mind  of  a  person. 
Such  a  state  is  called  doubt.  Secondly,  if  mind  inclines  more  to  a 
thing  out  of  the  two  states  and  if  mind  knows  that  it  may  be 
otherwise,  the  first  state  will  be  stronger.  For  instance,  if  you  are 
asked  about  a  man  who  is  in  your  sight  pious  and  God-fearing, 
whether  he  will  be  punished  or  not,  your  mind  inclines  more  to  his 
not  being  punished  as  there  are  outward  signs  of  his  piety.  Never 
the  less  you  admit  the  possibility  that  something  which  requires 
punishment  has  been  concealed  in  his  secret  life.  This  admission  is 
mixed  with  your  first  inclination  and  creates  in  your  mind 
conjecture.  The  third  state  is  that  the  mind  is  strongly  inclined  to  a 
thing  and  opinion  adverse  to  it  cannot  come  to  it.  This  is  called 
I'teqad  or  belief  approaching  certainty.  This  is  the  conjecture  of 
the  general  public  about  religious  matters. 


82  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

The  fourth  state  is  sure  or  certain  faith  in  a  matter  without  the 
least  doubt  in  it.  This  is  called  'yeqin'.  For  instance,  when  a  wise 
man  is  asked:  "Is  there  anything  eternal  in  existence"  he  cannot 
suddenly  reply  to  it  as  the  eternal  thing  is  not  subject  to  conjecture  . 
or  perceived  by  the  senses  and  it  is  not  like  the  sun  and  the  moon  of 
which  the  truth  can  be  perceived  by  eyes.  So  the  existence  of  an 
eternal  thing  cannot  suddenly  be  said  to  be  true  without  thought. 
The  truth  of  an  eternal  thing  is  not  such  as  the  truth  that  two  is 
greater  than  one  or  as  the  truth  that  nothing  can  occur  without  a 
cause.  Knowledge  of  these  things  come  out  spontaneously  without 
the  necessity  of  any  thought.  So  true  belief  in  the  truth  of  an  eternal 
thing  does  not  come  spontaneously  in  the  mind.  Those  who  have 
knowledge  of  an  eternal  thing  tell  the  people  of  it  and  the  people 
believe  it  and  stand  on  it.  This  is  called  I'tiqad  or  faith.  This  is  the 
state  of  all  common  people. 

But  there  are  such  men  who  established  the  truth  of  an 
eternal  matter  by  such  proof  as  follows.  If  there  be  no  existence  of 
an  eternal  thing,  then  all  things  are  originated  or  created.  If  all  the 
things  are  created,  they  come  without  cause  or  some  of  them 
come  to  existence  without  cause.  This  is  impossible  and  that 
which  leads  to  impossibility  is  itself  impossible.  Therefore  the 
mind  is  compelled  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  something 
eternal.  All  things  fall  under  one  of  the  three  categories.  91)  All 
existing  things  are  eternal,  (2)  or  all  existing  things  are  originated 
or  created,  (3)  or  somethings  are  eternal  and  somethings  are 
originated.  If  all  things  are  eternal,  the  object  is  attained  as  the 
truth  of  eternal  things  has  been  established  by  proof.  But  if  all 
things  are  created,  it  becomes  impossible  as  the  existence  of  a 
thing  becomes  without  a  cause.  In  that  case,  either  the  first  or  the 
third  position  is  established.  The  knowledge  thus  obtained 
through  reasoning  such  as  above  or  through  the  mind 
instinctively  as  the  impossibility  of  any  created  thing  coming 
into  existence  without  a  cause  or  through  traditions  as  the 
knowledge  that  there  is  existence  of  Mecca,  or  through 
experimentation  such  as  our  knowledge  that  cooked  scammony 
is  purgative,  or  through  some  evidences  as  we  have  already 
stated,  is  called  Yeqin  or  certain  faith.  The  ordinary  meaning  of 
Yeqin  is  belief  without  doubt. 

The  second  meaning  of  Yeqin  is  that  of  the  jurists,  sufis  arid 
most  of  the  learned  men.  It  is  not  to  look  at  a  thing  with 


Vol-1  KNOWLEDGE  83 

conjecture  or  doubt.  For  instance,  it  is  said  that  so  and  so  has  got 
weak  faith  about  death,  although  there  is  no  doubt  in  it.  Another 
instance  is  that  so  and  so  has  firm  faith  in  earning  wealth, 
although  a  time  comes  when  he  cannot  even  earn  his  livelihood. 
Thus  whenever  anything  prevails  over  the  mind  and  enjoins  one 
to  do  and  prohibits  him  not  to  do  is  called  Yeqin  or  certain  faith. 
All  people  believe  firmly  about  death  and  it  is  free  from  doubt, 
but  there  are  men  who  don't  turn  their  attention  to  it  and  there 
are  men  who  engage  all  their  thoughts  towards  preparation  foT 
death.  Such  men  are  called  men  of  strong  faith.  For  this  reason, 
some  one  said:  I  have  seen  nothing  so  certain  and  at  the  same 
time  completely  unheeded  as  death.  According  to  this,  faith  may 
be  described  either  with  strength  or  with  weakness.  What  I  wish 
to  impress  is  that  the  object  of  the  learned  man  of  the  hereafter  is 
to  make  his  faith  strong,  certain  and  firm  as  it  is  a  medicine  of 
doubt,  so  that  it  becomes  so  strong  in  his  mind  that  it  can  rule 
over  him. 

Thus  it  is  clear  from  what  has  been  described  above., that 
Yeqin  can  be  described  in  there  meanings  -  as  to  strength  and 
weakness,  increase  and  decrease  and  clearness  and  vagueness. 

What  the  Prophets  said  from  the  first  to  the  last  is  a  subject  of 
certain  faith.  Yeqin  is  a  work  of  special  Mar  fat.  These  matters 
appertain  to  Shariat  and  I  am  mentioning  some  of  these  matters 
which  are  the  roots  of  certain  faith. 

(1)  TAUHID:  This  is  to  Relieve  firmly  that  all  things  come 
from  the  Cause  of  all  causes,  with  no  attention  to  the  secondary 
causes  but  to  the  First  Cause.  It  is  not  to  look  to  the  means  or 
intermediaries  but  to  the  original  and  primary  cause.  It  is  that  all 
causes  come  from  Him  and  that  everything  is  within  His  control 
and  power.  It  is  that  everything  is  subject  to  His  will  and  nothing 
has  got  any  will  of  its  own.  If  one  has  got  sure  faith  in  this  Tauhid, 
his  wrath  on  others,  hatred  for  others  and  jealousy  for  others 
vanish  away  and  His  will  remains  supreme  in  his  mind.  Then  to 
him,  the  means  or  intermediaries  become  like  hand  and  pen.  He 
does  not  express  gratefulness  to  hand  and  pen  as  he  considers 
them  as  weapons  and  means.  This  certain  faith  is  highest  in  rank. 
Then  he  understands  that  the  sun,  moon,  stars,  animals,  plants 
and  all  creatures  are  subject  to  His  order,  that  the  pen  moves 
under  the  control  of  the  Writer  who  moves  them.  (2)  From  this, 
his  faith  that  God  provides  every  man  with  subsistence  grows 


84  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

strong.  God  says:  There  is  no  moving  animal  in  the  earth  whose 
provision  is  not  upon  God  (9  :  8Q).  He  believes  that  what  has 
been  pre-ordained  for  him  must  come  to  pass.  The  result  of 
this  certain  faith  is  that  he  will  not  regret  for  anything  he  loses. 
(3)  Then  he  believes  firmly  in  the  following:  Whoever  does  an 
atom  weight  of  good  will  find  it  and  whoever  does  an  atom 
weight  of  evil  will  find  it  -  (99  :  7).  That  is  a  faith  of  reward  and 
punishment.  As  there  is  connection  of  bread  with  satisfaction  of 
stomach  and  punishment  with  sins  or  poison  with  loss  of  life,  so 
he  finds  connection  of  good  deeds  with  rewards  arid  of  evil  deeds 
with  punishment.  As  there  is  greed  to  satisfy  hunger  whether  its 
quantity  is  large  or  small,  so  he  strives  to  do  all  acts  of  worship, 
whether  few  or  many.  Just  as  a  man  avoids  poison  regardless  of 
quantity,  so  a  man  avoids  sins,  major  or  minor.  Belief  in  its  first 
meaning  is  found  among  all  believers,  while  certain  belief  of  the 
second  meaning  is  found  only  in  the  favourites  of  God.  The 
stronger  the  faith,  the  stronger  is  carefulness  and  the  more  are  the 
religious  actions. 

Fourthly,  he  believes  that  God  watches  him  in  all 
circumstances  and  sees  his  currents  of  thoughts  in  mind  and 
machinations  of  the  devil.  This  certain  faith  is  in  accordance  with 
the  first  interpretation.  The  object  is  noble  according  to  the 
second  interpretation  as  it  is  the  faith  of  a  Siddiq.  In  this  case,  he 
observes  all  the  ettiquits  in  loneliness  as  he  observes  them  before 
an  emperor.  For  this  reason,  he  makes  his  heart  more  pure  and 
clean  than  his  body.  In  this  condition,  shame,  fear,  humility, 
peace,  modesty  and  all  other  praise  worthy  qualities  appear  in 
him.  So  certain  faith  is  the  root  and  its  branches  are  many. 

(9)  NINTH  SIGN:  Another  sign  of  the  learned  man  of  the 
next  world  is  that  he  becomes  humble  and  adopts  silence.  The 
effect  of  God-fear  appears  on  his  body,  dress,  character 
movements,  speech  and  silence.  If  any  man  looks  at  him,  it 
reminds  him  of  God  and  his  nature  and  character  are  proofs  of 
his  actions.  His  eye  is  a  mirror  of  his  mind.  The  signs  of  the 
learned  man  of  the  hereafter  are  recognised  in  his  face, 
tranquillity,  modesty  and  freedom  from  pride  and  vanity.  A 
certain  wise  man  said:  God  has  not  given  a  man  with  a  garment 
better  than  the  garment  of  God-fear.  It  is  the  garment  of  the 
Prophets,  Siddiqs,  pirs  and  the  learned  men.  The  sage  Sahal 
Tastari  divided  the  learned  into  three  classes,  (a)  One  class  are 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  85 

those  who  are  well  acquainted  with  the  commands  of  God  but 
not  punishment  of  God.  They  are  examined  by  lawful  and 
unlawful  things.  Such  kind  of  learning  is  God-fear  which  cannot 
be  inherited.  (2)  Another  class  are  those  who  have  got  knowledge 
of  the  commands  of  God  and  His  punishments  and  they  are  the 
ordinary  believers.  (3)  Another  class  are  those  who  have 
knowledge  of  God,  His  commands  and  punishments.  They  are 
siddiqs,  and  God-fear  and  humility  become  strong  in  their 
minds.  Hazrat  Omar  said:  Acquire  knowledge  and  therefor 
acquire  tranquillity,  gravity  and  patience.  Humble  yourselves 
before  your  teacher  and  let  your  students  do  the  same  before  you. 
Be  not  among  the  proud  learned  men  lest  your  knowledge 
encourages  ignorance.  There  is  in  a  tradition:  There  are  such 
good  man  among  my  followers  who  rejoice  getting  the  mercy  of 
God  and  weep  secretly  for  fear  of  His  punishment.  Their  soul  is 
in  the  earth  but  their  wisdom  is  in  the  hereafter.  They  walk  with 
modesty  and  come  close  to  God  through  the  means  of  His  grave. 
Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  Patience  is  the  vizier  of  knowledge, 
kindness'its  father  and  humility  its  garment.  Bashr-b-Hares  said: 
If  a  man  seeks  to  rule  by  knowledge,  the  nearness  of  God  keeps 
enmity  with  him,  as  he  is  detested  both  in  heaven  and  earth. 
There  is  a  story  that  a  certain  wise  man  of  Banu  Israil  composed 
360  books  on  wisdom  for  which  he  was  called  Hakim  (wise).  God 
then  revealed  to  his  Prophet:  Tell  so  and  so,  the  earth  has  become 
full  of  your  hypocrisy  and  you  have  not  sought  My  pleasure 
therein.  So  I  accept  nothing  of  it.  The  man  became  repentant  and 
gave  it  up.  He  began  to  mix  with  the  people  and  roamed  in  the 
streets  befriending  all  the  children  of  Israil  and  he  humiliated 
himself.  God  then  revealed  to  their  Prophet:  Tell  him:  You  have 
now  earned  My  pleasure. 

It  has  been  narrated  that  the  Prophet  was  asked:  O  Prophet  of 
God,  which  actionls  best?  He  replied:  To  avoid  evil  and  to  make 
your  tongue  wet  with  the  remembrance  of  God.  He  was  asked: 
Which  companion  is  best?  He  replied:  The  companion  who  helps 
you  when  you  remember  God  and  reminds  you  when  you  forget. 
He  was  asked:  Which  companion  is  worst?  He  replied:  The 
companion  who  does  not  remind  you  when  you  forget.  If  you 
remember,  he  does  not  help  you.  He  was  asked:  Who  is  the  most 
learned  man  among  the  people?  He  replied:  The  most  learned 
man  among  them  is  he  who  fears  God  most.  He  was  asked: 
Inform  us  about  the  best  men  among  us,  so  that  we  may  keep 


86  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

company  with  them.  The  Prophet  said:  Those  who  remind  you  of  . 
God  whenever  they  are  seen.  He  was  asked:  Who  are  the  worst 
among  men?  He  said:  O  God,  I  seek  Thy  pardon.  They  said:  Tell 
us,  O  Apostle  of  God.  He  said:  The  corrupt  learned  men.  The 
Prophet  said:  Those  who  have  been  the  most  God-fearing  in  the 
world  will  be  the  most  secure  in  the  hereafter.  Those  who  have 
wept  much  in  the  world  will  laugh  most  in  the  hereafter.  Those 
who  have  suffered  most  in  the  world  will  be  happiest  in  the 
hereafter. 

Hazrat  Ali  said  in  his  sermon:  This  is  my  responsibility  and  I 
"  am  pledged  for  the  following.  The  crops  of  nobody  will  wither  if 
they  were  planted  with  piety.  The  roots  of  no  tree  will  get  thirsty 
if  they  were  raised  with  righteousness.  The  most  ignorant  man  is 
he  who  knows  not  the  honour  of  God-fear.  The  worst  man  to  God 
is  one  who  gathers  knowledge  from  every  quarter  and  yet 
remains  covered  in  the  darkness  of  trials.  The  worst  man  calls 
such  a  man  a  learned  man,  while  he  has  not  lived  a  single  day  in 
learning.  He  gets  up  in  the  morning  from  sleep  and  searches  for 
increase  of  wealth.  He  goes  after  greater  knowledge  little 
knowing  that  a  little  knowledge  of  right  kind  is  better  than  a 
great  deal  of  knowledge  which  detracts  man  from  God.  He  lives 
in  doubts  and  scepticism  like  living  in  the  spider's  web  and  does 
never  know  whether  he  committed  mistake  or  not. 

Hazrat  Ali  said:  When  you  hear  the  word  of  knowledge, 
remain  silent  and  don' t  mix  it  with  frivolous  talks.  It  will  yield  no 
fruit.  Someone  said:  If  a  teacher  possesses  three  qualities,  gifts 
become  perfect  on  a  student,  patience,  humility  and  good 
conduct.  When  a  student  possesses  three  qualities,  gifts  become 
perfect  on  a  teacher,  intelligence,  good  manners  and  keen 
understanding.  In  short  the  qualities  which  the  Quran  mentions 
are  found  in  the  learned  men  of  the  hereafter  as  they  learn  the 
Quran  for  actions  and  not  to  acquire  name,  fame,  power  and 
prestige.  A  certain  wise  man  said:  Five  qualities  inferred  from 
five  verses  of  the  Quran  are  the  signs  of  the  learned  men  of  the 
hereafter,  God-fear,  humility,  modesty,  good  conduct  and  love  of 
the  hereafter  more  than  that  of  the  world  which  is  asceticism. 
Fear  of  God  is  based  on  the  following  verse:  Of  His  servants,  the 
learned  fear  God  most  (35  :  25Q).  Humility  is  based  on  the 
following  verse:  They  are  humble  to  God  and  they  barter  not  His 
verses  for  a  small  price  (3  :  198  Q).  Modesty  is  based  on  the 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  87 

following  verse:  And  lower  your  wing  for  the  believers  (15 :  88Q). 
Good  conduct  is  based  on  the  following  verse:  You  have  become 
gentle  to  them  on  account  of  the  mercy  of  God  (3  :  153  Q)., 
Asceticism  is  based  on  the  following  verse:  But  they  to  whom 
knowledge  has  been  given  said:  Woe  to  you,  the  reward  of  God  is 
better  for  one  who  believes  and  does  good  deeds  (28 :  80Q). 

When  the  Prophet  read  this  verse:  If  God  wishes  to  guide 
anyone,  He  expands  his  breast  for  Islam  ( 6 :  125),  he  was  asked  as 
to  the  meaning  of  expansion  of  breast  and  he  said:  This  is  light. 
When  it  is  cast  into  heart,  it  expands.  He  was  asked:  Has  it  got  any 
sign?  The  Prophet  replied:  Yes,  to  be  separate  from  this  world  of 
deceit,  to  turn  to  the  hereafter  and  to  prepare  for  death  before  it 
actually  comes. 

(10)  TENTH  SIGN:  Another  sign  of  the  learned  man  of  the 
hereafter  is  that  he  studies  the  learning  of  practice  and  avoids 
such  leanings  as  destroy  actions,  keep  mind  anxious  and  provoke 
evils.  The  root  of  religion  is  to  be  careful  of  evil  deeds.  For  this 
reason,  a  poet  said: 

I  have  not  known  evil  for  evil's  sake. 
I  have  not  known  it  but  to  live. 
He  who  is  ignorant  of  the  evil  of  men. 
Falls  un  'to'it  al  though  he  is  wise. 

Hasan  Basari  was  the  man  whose  words  had  the  greatest 
similarity  to  those  of  the  Prophet  and  whose  ways  of  life  nearest 
■  to  those  of  the  companions.  He  was  asked:  O  Abu  Sayeed,  you 
utter  such  words  which  nobody  knows  except  you.  Wherefrom 
have  you  got  them?  He  said:  From  Huzaifah,  Huzaifah  was 
asked:  You  utter  such  words  which  no  companion  heard  except 
you.  Wherefrom  have  you  got  them?  He  said:  From  the 
Messenger  of  God,  He  was  always  asked  about  good  deeds  but  I 
used  to  ask  him  about  evil  deeds,  so  that  I  may  not  fall  therein. 
The  companions  were  want  to  ask  the  Prophet:  O  Apostle  of  God, 
what  are  the  rewards  of  one  who  does  such  and  such  good  deeds? 
I  used  to  ask  him:  O  Apostle  of  God,  what  corrupts  the  deeds?  So 
Hazrat  Huzaifa  had  special  knowledge  about  hypocrisy, 
hypocrites  and  subtleties  of  dangers  and  difficulties. 

The  natural  way  of  the  actions  of  the  learned  men  of  the 
hereafter  is  to  make  efforts  about  the  different  conditions  of  heart 
but  this  knowledge  is  now  rare.  Whenever  anything  of  it  is 


88  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

presented  to  a  learned  man,  he  expresses  wonder  at  it  and  says 
thatitis  the  deception  of  one  who  believe*  sermons.  A  poet  said: 

"The  true  path  is  one  out  of  many  paths. 

Very  few  are  so  journers  to  this  path. 

Their  goal  is  obscure,  they  are  unknown. 

Slowly  and  steadily  they  march  to  their  destination, 

People  are  indifferent  to  their  goal,, 

Ignorant  also  are  they  of  the  true  path." 

It  has  been  said  that  at  Basra  there  were  120  men  of  scholastic 
theology  regarding  speech  and  Zikr  but  there  were  only  three 
men  regarding  the  knowledge  of  Yeqin  or  certain  faith  and  the 
conditions  of  soul  and  secret  attributes.  They  were  Sahal  Tastari, 
Shu'bi  and  Abdur  Rahman. 

(11)  ELEVENTH  SIGN:  Another  sign  of  the  learned  man  of 
the  next  world  is  that  he  relies  on  his  insight  and  knowledge 
which  enlighten  his  heart  and  not  on  books  and  what  he  learns 
from  others.  His  object  of  following  is  what  the  law  giver  said 
and  enjoined.  The  companions  believed  blindly  what  they  heard 
from  the  Prophet  and  they  put  into  it  practice.  He  from  whose 
soul  screen  has  been  removed  and  whose  soul  has  been  illumined 
with  the  light  of  guidance  is  an  object  to  be  followed  and  he 
should  not  follow  others  besides  him.  For  this  reason,  Ibn  Abbas 
said:  There  is  nobody  except  the  Apostle  of  God  whose 
knowledge  is  not  sometimes  followed  and  sometimes  rejected. 
One  sage  said:  We  placed  in  our  hearts  and  in  our  eyes  what  we 
received  from  the  Prophet.  We  accepted  something  of  what  came 
from  the  companions  and  rejected  something.  Their  successors 
were  mere  men  like  ourselves.  The  companions  were  superior, 
because  they  saw  the  circumstances  under  which  the  Prophet 
had  lived  and  saw  with  their  own  eyes  the  revelation  of  the 
Quran  and  hence  their  rank  is  higher  as  their  minds  were  imbued 
with  it.  The  light  of  Prophethood  was  so  strong  on  them  that  it 
saved  them  from  many  sins.  They  were  not  satisfied  with  the 
words  of  others.  Their  minds  were  distant  from  books  and 
manuscripts  which  were  not  in  vogue  in  their  times,  nor  in  the 
time  of  their  successors.  These  books  were  compiled  first  in  about 
120  Hijra  after  the  death  of  the  companions  and  some  of  their 
successors  specially  after  the  death  of  Hazrat  Sayeed-b- 
Masayyeb,  Hasan  Basari  and  other  pious  successors.  Hazrat  Abu 
Bakr  and  one  party  of  the  companions  did  not  like  to  collect  even 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  89 

the  Quran  in  a  book  form  for  fear  that  the  people  would  not 
commit  the  Quran  to  memory  and  lest  the  people  depend  only  on 
this.  Then  Hazrat  Omar  and  some  companions  gave  advice  to  put 
it  in  to  writing.  Thus  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  had  the  Quran  collected  in 
one  book.  Ahmed-b-Hanbal  was  critical  of  Malek  for  his 
composition  of  Al-Muatta  and  said:  He  has  done  what  the 
companions  did  not  do: 

It  has  been  said  that  the  first  books  in  Islam  was  written  by 
Ibn-Juray  on  dialects  of  the  Quran  and  historical  sayings  based 
on  what  he  heard  from  Mujahed,  Ata  and  the  students  of 
Ibn-Abbas  at  Mecca.  Then  Moammer-b-Rashed  composed  a  book 
in  Yemen  on  traditions  and  usages  of  the  Prophet.  Then  came  the 
book  Mutta  of  Imam  Malek  and  the  Jame  of  Sufiyan  Saori.  Then 
in  the  fourth  century  many  books  on  scholastic  theology  and 
argumentation  were  written.  When  the  people  were  inclined  to 
these  books,  Yeqin  or  certain  belief  began  to  diminish.  Thereafter 
the  science  of  heart,  research  in  to  the  qualities  of  soul  and  the 
learning  of  safety  from  the  stratagem  of  the  devil  began  to 
disappear.  Thus  it  became  the  custom  to  call  the  scholastic 
theologians  and  story  tellers  who  embellished  their  words  with 
ornamentation  and  ryhmed  prose.  Thus  the  learnings  of  the  next 
world  began  to  decrease. 

(12)  TWELVTH  SIGN:  Another  sign  of  the  learned  man  of 
the  next  world  is  that  he  saves  himself  from  innovations  even 
though  the  people  are  unanimous  on  innovations  and  novelties. 
He  is  rather  diligent  in  studying  the  conditions  of  the 
companions,  their  conduct  and  character  and  their  deeds.  They 
spent  their  lives  in  jihad,  meditation,  avoidance  of  major  and 
minor  sins,  observation  of  their  outer  conduct  and  inner  self.  But 
the  great  object  of  thought  of  the  learned  men  of  the  present  time 
is  to  teach,  compose  books,  to  make  argumentation,  to  give 
Fatwa,  to  become  mutawalli  of  Waqf  estates,  enjoy  the  properties 
of  orphans,  frequent  the  rulers  and  enjoy  their  company. 

Hazrat  Ali  said:  The  best  of  us  is  one  who  follows  this 
religion.'  In  short  if  you  follow  the  companions  of  the  Apostle  of 
God,  no  blame  will  attach  you  even  if  you  act  in  opposition  to  the 
people  of  this  age.  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  Two  innovators 
have  appeared  in  Islam,  a  man  of  bad  judgment  who  holds  that 
paradise  is  for  those  whose  judgment  is  like  mine,  and  a  rich  man 
who  loves  this  world  and  searches  it.  Reject  these  two.  God  saved 


90  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

the  learned  man  of  the  next  world  from  these  two  kinds  of 
persons. 

The  Prophet  said:  Word  and  guidance  act  two  matters.  The 
best  word  is  the  word  of  God  and  the  best  guidance  is  the 
guidance  of  the  Prophet.  Beware  of  innovation,  because  it  is  the 
worst  thing.  Every  innovation  is  here  say  and  every  here  say  is  a 
sin.  Beware  don't  think  that  the  end  will  be  delayed.  Your  hearts 
may  become  hard.  Whatever  is  ordained  is  impending.  Beware, 
what  has  passed  will  not  return.  The  Prophet  said  in  a  sermon: 
Blessed  is  he  whose  concern  for  his  own  faults  keeps  him  away  of 
finding  fault  of  others,  who  spends  out  of  his  lawful  earnings, 
keeps  company  with  theologians  and  the  wise  and  spurns  the 
sinners  and  the  wicked  people.  Blessed  is  he  who  humbles 
himself,  makes  his  conduct  refined,  heart  good  and  does  not  do 
harm  to  the  people.  Blessed  is  he  who  acts  up  to  his  knowledge, 
spends  his  surplus  wealth,  abstains  from  superfluous  talks, 
follows  sunnah  and  does  not  introduce  innovations. 

Ibn  Masud  used  to  say:  In  latter  days,  good  guidance  will  be 
better  than  many  actions.  He  also  said:  You  are  now  in  an  age 
when  the  best  of  you  is  one  who  is  quick  in  doing  good  deeds,  but 
soon  there  will  come  an  age  when  the  best  of  you  will  be  one  who 
will  be  firm  in  faith  and  remain  silent  to  ward  of  doubt.  Hazrat 
Huzaifa  said  a  more  wonderful  saying:  Your  good  deeds  of  this 
age  are  the  evil  deeds  of  the  past  age  and  the  evil  deeds  of.  this  age 
will  be  considered  as  good  deeds  of  the  next  age.  You  will  be  in 
good  deeds  till  you  know  the  truth.  The  learned  man  among  you 
will  not  conceal  truth.  He  said  the  truth,  because  most  of  the  good 
deeds  of  this  age  were  reprehensible  at  the  time  of  the 
companions.  The  good  deeds  of  our  age  is  the  embellishment  of 
mosques,  excess  in  ablution  and  bath,  huge  expenses  in  the 
construction  of  buildings  for  mosques,  spreading  of  soft  and  fine 
rugs  in  mosques  etc.  The  early  Muslims  seldom  placed  anything 
for  their  prayer.  Hazrat  Ibn  Masud  truly  said:  You  are  living  in  an 
age  when  passion  is  harnessed  by  knowledge,  but  soon  there  will 
come  over  you  a  time  wherein  passion  will  have  priority  over 
knowledge.  Imam  Ahmad-b-Hanbal  used  to  say:  People  have 
discarded  knowledge  and  followed  strange  things.  How  little  is 
their  learning.  God  is  our  helper.  Imam  Malek  said:  In  past  times 
people  were  not  in  the  habit  of  questioning  as  they  do 
now-a-days  and  their  learned  men  did  never  say  that  such  a  thing 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  91 

is  lawful  and  such  a  thing  is  unlawful  and  the  question  of 
unlawfulness  never  arose,  as  their  condemnation  of  unlawful 
thing  was  open. 

Abu  Solaiman  Darani  said:  Nobody  who  gets  any 
inspiration  for  something  good  should  attempt  to  do  it  unless  it  is 
conformed  by  a  tradition.  Let  him  then  praise  God  for  he  has  got 
what  was  in  his  mind.  When  the  Caliph  Merwan  introduced  the 
custom  of  a  pulpit  in  the  I'd  prayer,  Hazrat  Abu  Sayeed  Khodri 
said  to  him:  O  Merwan,  is  it  not  innovation?  He  said:  It  is  not 
innovation.  It  is  better  than  what  you  know.  Many  people 
assembled  here.  I  wish  that  my  sound  should  reach  them.  He 
said:  By  God,  you  don't  know  better  than  what  I  know.  By  God,  I 
will  not  pray  to-day  behind  you.  He  declined  to  pray  behind  him 
saying  that  the  Prophet  used  to  stand  with  a  stick  in  his  hand  at 
the  time  of  I'd  prayer  and  deliver  sermon. 

There  is  a  well  known  Hadis:  Whoever  introduces  such  an 
innovation  in  our  religion  which  is  not  there  is  an  evil  man.  There 
is  in  another  Hadis:  The  curse-  of  God,  angels  and  all  people  is 
upon  one  who  deceives  our  people.  He  was  asked:  O  Prophet  of 
God,  what  is  the  deception  of  your  people?  He  said:  God  has  an  angel 
who  proclaims  every  day  Saving:  He  who  oppresses  the  religion  by 
introducing  an  innovation  in  opposition  to  the  usages  of  the  Prophet 
in  relation  to  one  who  commits  it,  is  like  a  man  who  changes  the  reign 
of  a  king  in  relation  to  one  who  opposes  his  particular  order.  The  latter 
crime  can  be  forgiven  but  there  is  no  pardon  of  one  who  changes  the 
regime.  A  certain  learned  man  said:  Truth  is  heavy.  He  who  increases 
it  transgresses  and  he  who  decreases  it  fails  and  he  who  keeps 
attached  to  it  is  satisfied.  The  Prophet  said:  Adopt  the  middle  course. 
He  who  goes  in  advance  retards  it  and  he  who  remains  behind 
advances.  God  says:  Avoid  those  who  make  their  religion  a  sport  and 
pastime  (6 :  69Q).  God  says:  Have  you  seen  one  who  considers  his  evil 
as  good  and  it  appears  to  him  alright?'  What  has  been  introduced  as 
innovation  after  the  companions  and  what  is  unnecessary  appertain 
to  sport  and  pastime. 

These  are  the  twelve  signs  of  the  learned  men  of  the  next 
world  and  every  quality  was  found  in  the  learned  men  of  early 
ages.  Be  therefore  one  of  the  two.  Either  be  imbued  with  these 
attributes  or  be  repentant  after  admitting  your  sins  and  faults. 
But  never  be  the  third  one,  as  in  that  case  doubt  will  arise  in  your 
mind.  If  you  take  the  weapons  of  the  world  in  lieu  of  religion, 


92  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

follow  the  conduct  of  the  transgressors  and  if  you  take  to 
ignorance  and  refusal  of  faith,  you  will  reside  with  those  who  are 
doomed  to  destruction  and  despair. 

SECTION  7 

INTELLECT  AND  ITS  NOBLE  NATURE 

The  noble  nature  of  knowledge  has  been  revealed  through 
intellect.  Intellect  is  the  source  and  fountain  head  of  knowledge  and 
its  foundation.  Knowledge  is  like  the  fruit  of  a  tree  and  it  flows  from 
intellect,  or  like  the  light  of  the  sun  or  like  the  vision  of  the  eye.  Why 
should  it  not  be  honoured  when  it  is  the  cause  of  fortune  in  this 
■  world  and  the  next?  What  is  there  to  distinguish  between  beasts  and 
men  except  intellect?  Even  a  ferocious  beast  which  has  got  more 
strength  than  man  fears  a  man  at  seeing  him  as  it  knows  that  he  may 
put  him  into  snare  on  account  of  his  intellect. 

For  this  reason,  the  Prophet  said:  Just  as  the  rank  of  the 
Prophet  upon  his  followers,  so  is  the  rank  of  an  old  man  over  his 
people.  This  is  not  for  his  wealth  or  for  his  long  body  or  for  his 
great  strength  but  for  his  ripe  experience  grown  out  of  intellect. 
For  this  reason,  you  find  the  ignorant  near  the  quarupeds  and 
they  were  about  to  kill  the  Prophet.  But  when  they  saw  his  noble 
countenance,  they  feared  him  and  there  shone  on  their  face  the 
brilliance  of  his  prophethood  although  it  was  latent  in  his  soul  in 
the  same  manner  as  intellect.  My  object  is  to  show  the  honour  of 
intellect  from  the  Quran  and  Hadis.  Intellect  has  been  termed  as 
Nur  or  light  in  the  following  verse:  God  is  the  light  of  the  heavens 
and  the  earth.  His  light  is  like  a  niche  etc  (24  :  35).  He  named 
benefiting  learning  arising  therefrom  as  spirit,  revelation  or  life. 

God  said:  Thus  I  have  revealed  to  you  spirit  by  My  command 
(42 :  5Q).  God  said:  Have  I  not  given  life  to  one  dead  and  have  I  not 
created  light  for  him  with  the  help  of  which  he  can  mix  with  the 
people  -  6  :  122?  Whenever  God  mentioned  about  light  and 
darkness,  He  meant  knowledge  and  ignorance.  God  said:  He  will 
take  them  from  darkness  into  light  (5  :  18Q).  The  Prophet  said:  O 
people,  acquire  knowledge  from  your  Lord  and  advise  one  another 
with  intellect.  Know  what  you  have  been  enjoined  and  what  you 
have  been  prohibited .  Know  that  intellect  will  give  you  rank  to  your 
learning.  Know  that  intelligent  man  is  who  obeys  God,  although  his 
face  is  ugly,  his  body  dwarf,  his  rank  low  and  appearance  shabby. 
An  ignorant  man  is  he  who  disobeys  God  though  his  appearance  is 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  93 

beautiful,  his  body  long,  his  conduct  good  and  his  speech  fluent. 
He  who  disobeys  God  is  not  more  intelligent  than  an  ape  or  a  pig. 
Don't  mix  with  those  who  received  honour  for  love  of  the  world 
as  they  are  doomed.  The  Prophet  said:  The  first  thing  God  created 
is  intellect.  He  said  to  intellect:  Come  near  and  it  came  near.  Then 
He  said  to  it:  Go  back  and  it  went  back.  Then  God  said:  By  My 
honour  and  glory:  I  have  created  nothing  in  my  sight  more 
honourable  than  you.  Through  you  I  take,  through  you  I  give, 
through  you  I  give  reward  and  through  you  I  punish. 

Once  a  party  of  men  were  praising  a  man  before  the  Prophet 
and  praised  excessively.  The  Prophet  asked:  How  is  his  intellect? 
They  said:  We  shall  inform  you  after  seeking  his  diligence  in 
prayer  and  other  good  deeds.  Why  do  you  ask  us  about  his 
intellect?  The  Prophet  said:  The  ignorance  of  an  ignorant  man  is 
more  harmful  than  the  transgression  of  a  sinner.  On  the 
Resurrection  day,  a  man  will  be  raisedito  the  rank  of  nearness  to 
God  in  proportion  to  his  intellect.  Trie  Prophet  said:  Nobody 
earns  a  better  thing  than  intellect.  It  shows  him  path  towards 
guidance  and  saves  him  from  destruction.  The  intellect  of  a  man 
does  not  become  perfect  and  his  religion  firm  till  his  faith  does 
not  become  perfect.  The  Prophet  said:  A  man  acquires  the  rank  of 
praying  all  nights  and  fasting  all  days  through  good  conduct. 
The  good  conduct  of  a  man  does  not  become  perfect  till  his 
intellect  is  not  complete  and  when  his  intellect  becomes  perfect 
he  obeys  God  and  disobeys  his  enemy  the  devil.  The  Prophet 
said:  Every  thing  has  a  root  and  the  root  of  a  believer  is  intellect 
and  his  divine  service  will  be  in  proportion  to  his  intellect.  Have 
you  not  heard  the  words  of  the  sinners  in  Hell:  Had  we  heard  and 
understood,  we  would  not  have  been  the  inmates  of  Hell . 

Hazrat  Omar  asked  Tamim  Dari:  What  is  the  supreme 
authority  among  you?  He  said:  Intellect.  He  said:  You  have 
spoken  the  truth,  I  had  asked  the  Prophet  as  I  asked  you  and  he 
had  replied  as  you  replied.  Then  the  Prophet  said:  I  asked 
Gebrail:  What  is  the  main  thing?  He  said:  Intellect.  Hazrat 
Bara'a-b-Azeb  said:  I  asked  many  things  to  the  Prophet.  He  said: 
O  people,  for  everything  there  is  a  mainstay  and  the  mainstay  of 
man  is  intellect.  He  who  among  you  learns  a  thing  by  proof  and 
argument  is  the  best  in  intellect  among  you.  Hazrat  Abu 
Hurairah  said:  When  the  Prophet  returned  from  Uhud.  He  heard 
him  say:  So  and  so  is  such  and  such.  The  Prophet  then  said:  You 


94  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

have  got  no  knowledge  about  these  men.  They  asked:  O  Prophet 
of  God,  how?  He  said:  Each  man  has  got  rank  according  to  the 
intellect  'God'  has  given  him.  Their  victory  and  their  hope  were 
in  proportion  to  their  intellect.  So  they  reached  to  their  different 
ranks.  On  the  Resurrection  Day,  they  will  get  those  ranks 
according  to  their  intention  and  intellect. 

The  Prophet  said:  Angels  have  been  earnest  and  diligent  in 
their  obedience  to  God  through  then-  intellect,  while  the  believers 
among  the  children  of  Adam  have  endeavoured  to  that  effect  in 
proportion  to  their  intellect.  He  who  is  more  earnest  in  obedience 
of  God's  commands  is  greater  in  intellect.  Hazrat  Ayesha  asked: 
O  Apostle  of  God,  for  what  thing  do  the  people  in  the  world  get 
excellence  over  one  another?  He  said:  For  intellect.  I  asked:  In  the 
next  world?  He  said:  For  intellect.  I  asked  him:  Will  they  not  get 
their  rewards  in  proportion  to  their  actions?  The  Prophet  said:  O 
Ayesha,  do  they  act  except  in  proportion  to  their  intellect?  Their 
actions  will  be  in  proportion  to  their  intellect  and  they  will  get 
reward  in  proportion  to  their  actions. 

The  Prophet  said:  Everything  has  got  a  weapon  and  the 
weapon  of  a  believer  is  his  intellect.  Everything  has  got  a 
mainstay  and  the  mainstay  of  man  is  his  intellect.  Everything  has 
got  a  support  and  the  support  of  religion  is  intellect.  Every 
people  have  got  a  goal  and  the  goal  of  this  people  is  intellect. 
Every  people  has  got  a  missionary  and  the  missionary  of  the 
worshippers  is  intellect.  Every  merchant  has  got  merchandise 
and  the  merchandise  of  the  diligent  is  intellect.  Every  amity  has 
got  a  permanent  house  and  the  basis  of  the  house  of  Siddiqs  is 
intellect.  Everything  has  got  a  basis  and  the  basis  of  the  next 
world  is  intellect.  Everyman  has  got  an  offspring  to  whom  he  is 
as  crited  and  mentioned  and  the  offspring  of  the  Siddiqs  to  which 
they  are  ascribed  and  mentioned  is  intellect.  Every  journey  has 
got  a  tent  for  shelter  and  the  tent  of  a  believer  is  his  intellect.  The 
Prophet  said  He  who  is  greatest  in  intellect  among  you  is  most 
dearful  of  God  and  the  greatest  observant  of  what  has  been 
ordered  and  prohibited  even  though  he  does  not  do  much 
optional  worships  among  you.  The  Prophet  said:  The  believer 
whttis  most  load  by  God  is  he  whose  sole  goal  is  to  obey  the 
commands  of  God,  to  admonish  His  servants, --to  complete  his 
intellect  and  to  admonish  himself.  He  who  a^lttccording  to  that 
for  the  few  days  of  his  life  gets  success  and  salvation. 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  95 

TRUTH  ABOUT  INTELLECT 
AND  ITS  DIVISION 

Intellect  is  a  word  which  has  got  four  meanings. 

First  Meaning.  It  is  an  attribute  for  which  man  can  be 
distinguished  from  other  animals.  It  shows  the  path  to  theoretical 
learnings  on  mastering  the  abstract  disciplines.  Hares-b-Asad  said 
in  defining  intellect  that  it  is  a  natural  attribute  by  which  theoretical 
sciences  are  grasped  and  understood.  It  is  like  a  light  which  falls  in 
to  the  heart  and  helps  it  to  understand  things.  He  who  denies  this 
meaning  and  limits  intellect  to  understand  only  the  necessary 
sciences  is  wrong,  as  he  who  is  indifferent  to  the  sciences  and  he  who 
is  asleep  are  both  classed  by  him  in  the  same  rank.  They  have  got  this 
instinct  though  they  are  not  learned.  Just  as  life  in  them  helps  them  to 
move  their  bodies  at  sweet  will,  so  also  intellect  is  so  much 
intermingled  with  some  men  that  it  helps  them  towards  acquisition  of 
theoretical  learnings.  Had  it  been  possible  that  the  natural  intellect, 
sensation  and  power  of  understanding  of  a  man  and  an  ass  are  equal 
with  no  difference,  then  it  would  have  been  possible  that  an  ass  and  a 
lifeless  thing  are  equal  regarding  life  with  no  difference.  Just  as 
according  to  natural  law,  an  ass  has  been  helped  with  life,  so 
according  to  natural  law,  a  man  and  a  beast  have  been  differentiated 
in  the  matter  of  theoretical  learnings  by  intellect.  Intellect  is  like  a 
mirror  which  can  be  differentiated  from  other  things  having  bodies 
by  their  special  attribute  regarding  form  and  colour.  This  special 
attribute  is  a  polisher.  Forehead  can  he  differentiated  from  eye  as  it 
has  not  been  given  the  special  quality  of  sight  as  in  case  of  eye.  As 
there  is  connection  of  eye  with  sight,  so  also  there  is  the  connection 
of  this  natural  quality  of  intellect  with  learning.  Just  there  is 
connection  of  sun's  rays  with  sight,  so  there  is  connection  of  Shariat 
with  intellect  with  a  view  to  express  and  spread  learning. 

Second  Meaning:  According  to  this  meaning,  intellect  is 

wisdom  which  appears  even  in  childhood,  as  a  body  knows  by 

instinct  that  two  is  greater  than  one,  that  and  individual  cannot 

remain  in  two  different  place*  at  the  same  time  and  that  a  lawful 

thing  is  not  the  same  as  an  unlawful  thing. 

V 
Third  Meaning:  Intellect  means  according  to  this  knowledge 

acquired  through  experience.  Thus  he  who  is  laugh  by 

experience  and  schooled  by  time  is  called  a  man  of  intellect  and 

he  who  lacks  these  qualifications  is  called  ignorant. 


96  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

Fourth  Meaning:  When  the  natural  power  of  a  man  reaches 
such  point  by  which  he  can  know  th  result  of  actions  and  for 
which  the  present  pleasure  of  sexual  passion  is  controlled,  it  is 
said  that  he  has  got  intellect.  Such  a  man  is  called  an  intelligent 
man.  Such  a  man  acts  not  by  dictates  of  passion  but  by  the 
ultimate  result  of  an  action. 

The  first  meaning  of  intellect  is  its  base  and  fountain-head.  The 
second  meaning  is  its  branch  and  near  the  first  meaning.  The  third 
meaning  is  the  branch  of  the  first  and  second  meanings.  The  fourth 
meaning  is  the  ultimate  result  of  intellect  and  distant  goal.  The  first 
two  arise  as  natural  causes  and  the  latter  two  are  acquired. 

Hazrat  Ali  said: 

Knowledge  is  of  two  kinds,  natural  and  acquired, 
Acquired  knowledge  is  useless  without  the  other, 
Just  as  the  lightof  the  sun  rendered  useless, 
When  the  light  of  the  eye  is  closed. 

The  first  meaning  is  understood  from  the  following  Hadis. 
The  Prophet  said:  God  has  not  created  anything  more 
honourable  than  intellect.  The  fourth  meaning  is  understood 
from  the  following  Hadis:  When  a  man  comes  close  to  the  doors 
of  religion  and  good  deeds,  he  come  close  to  intellect.  The 
Prophet  said  to  Abu  Dard'a:  Increase  intellect,  then  your 
nearness  to  Lord  will  increase.  Abu  Darda's  said:  May  my 
parents  be  sacrificed  to  you,  how  will  it  be  in  my  case?  The 
Prophet  said:  Avoid  illegal  things  prohibited  by  God  and  fulfill 
the  obligatory  duties  ordered  by  God,  you  will  then  become  a 
man  of  intellect.  Do  good  deeds,  your  honour  and  fame  will 
increase  in  this  world  and  you  will  gain  for  that  proximity  to 
your  Lord  and  honour  in  the  next  world. 

Hazrat  Abu  Hurairah  and  others  went  to  the  Prophet  and 
said:  O  Prophet  of  God,  who  is  the  most  learned  of  men?  He  said: 
The  wise.  They  asked  him:  Who  is  the  best  worshipper  among 
men?  He  said:  The  wise.  They  asked  him:  Who  is  the  most 
excellent  of  men?  He  said:  The  wise.  They  asked  him:  Is  not  he  the 
wise  man  who  is  best  in  conduct,  whose  eloquence  is 
well-known,  whose  hand  is  full  of  charity  and  whose  rank  is 
exalted?  The  Prophet  said:  These  are  the  treasures  of  the  life  of 
the  world  but  the  hereafter  is  for  the  God-fearing.  The  wise  man 
is  God-fearing  though  he  is  abject  and  despised  in  the  world. 


Vol-I  KNOWLEDGE  97 

The  Piophet  said:  The  wise  man  is  he  who  believes  in  God, 
believes  in  His  Prophet  as  true  and  obeys  His  commandments.  It 
appears  from  this  that  intellect  is  the  name  of  natural  instinct.  It  is 
however  applied  to  knowledge  as  a  thing  is  known  by  its  fruit.  A 
learned  man  is  one  who  fears  God,  as  fear  of  God,  is  the  fruit  of 
learning.  Thus  the  word  intellect,  if  applied  to  any  fruit,  becomes 
like  a  natural  attribute.  Knowledge  does  not  come  from  outside. 
It  lies  under  intellect  as  a  natural  course.  It  is  like  water  hidden  in 
earth.  If  a  well  is  dug,  water  comes  out  of  itartd  no  new  thing  is 
poured  over  it.  Similarly  there  is  oil  latent  in  almond  seeds  and 
otto  in  roses.  To  this  effect,  God  says:  When  your  Lord  took  out 
progency  from  the  children  of  Adam  from  their  backs  and  then 
took  witnesses  'Am  I  not  your  Lord'  they  all  said:  Yes  -  7 : 171  Q. 
This  means  confession  of  their  souls,  not  verbal  promise  by 
tongue.  God  says  about  this  matter  :  If  you  ask  them  "Who 
created  you,"  they  would  certainly  answer  "God"  (43  :  87Q).  In 
other  words,  their  souls  will  bear  witness  about  it  God  says;  The 
natural  religion  of  God  upon  which  He  created  men  (30 :  29Q).  In 
other  words,  the  natural  religion  of  every  man  is  upon  a  thing 
that  he  should  have  faith  in  one  God  and  know  the  natural 
attribute  of  each  thing.  In  other  words,  this  attribute  is  latent  in 
him.  So  Iman  or  faith  is  hidden  in  the  heart  of  every  man. 

Viewed  from  this  angle,  men  are  of  two  kinds.  To  one  kind  of 
men  Iman  was  presented  but  they  forgot  it  and  they  are 
unbelievers  and  to  another  kind  of  men  who  cultivated  their 
souls  and  remembered  it.  These  people  are  like  those  who  forgot 
a  thing  after  remembering  it  and  afterwards  it  is  reminded  to 
them.  God  says  for  this  :  So  that  they  may  remember  (14  :  toQ). 
that  those  with  understanding  may  remember  (38  :  28Q). 
Remember  the  gits  of  God  upon  you  and  your  convenant  with 
Him  (5  :  10)  I  have  made  the  Quran  easy  for  rememberance.  Is 
there  any  one  who  will  remember  it  (54 :  17Q)? 

Soul  is  like  a  horseman  and  body  like  a  horse.  The  blindness 
of  the  horseman  is  more  serious  and  harmful  than  that  of  the 
horse.  The  power  of  internal  insight  is  more  than  that  of  external 
sight.  Thus  God  said :  His  soul  fulfilled  not  what  he  sa  w-53 :  18Q. 
And  thus  I  showed  Abraham  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  and 
earth  -  6 :  75Q.  The  opposite  of  inner  light  and  insight  is  blindness. 
God  says :  It  is  not  the  eyes  that  are  blind  but  the  souls  which  are  in 
breasts-22:45Q.  God  says :  He  who  is  blind  in  the  world  will  be  also 


98  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

blind  in  the  hereafter.  These  secrets  were  revealed  to  the  Prophet, 
some  through  insight  and  some  through  sight  and  both  were 
called  sight.  He  shose  insight  is  not  ripe,  acquired  nothing  but 
husk  of  religion.  These  attributes  are  called  intellect. 

INTELLECTUAL  DISPARITY  OF  MEN 

As  the  lands  are  of  serval  kinds,  so  also  there  is  disparity  of 
intellect  in  different  individuals  by  instinct.  This  disparity  of 
intellect  in  different  indviduals  is  also  understood  from  a 
tradition.  Abdullah-b-Salam  narrated  that  the  Prophet  at  the  end 
of  a  long  sermort  described  the  Throne  and  stated  that  the  angels 
asked  God :  O  God,  hast  Thou  created  anything  greatter  than  the 
Throne?  He  said:  Yes,  intellect.  They  asked:  How  great  is  it?  He 
said  :  Alas,  your  intellect  cannot  grasp  it.  Can  you  count  the 
number  of  sands?  They  said  :  No.  God  said  :  I  have  created 
intellect  in  different  minds  as  numerous  as  sands.  Some  men 
have  been  given  one  grain,  some  two,  some  three,  some  four, 
some  over  one  Farq,  some  one  Wasq  and  some  more. 

This  disparity  of  intelleft  is  found  in  all  its  meanings  as 
described  above  except  the  second,  namely  axiomatic 
knowledge,  such  as  the  thing  that  two  are  greater  than  one,  that 
an  object  cannot  reamin  in  two  different  places  at  the  same  time 
or  that  a  thing  cannot  be  both  eternal  and  originated.  Intellect 
with  reference  to  the  three  other  meanings  is  subject  to  disparity. 
With  regard  to  the  fourth  meaning  of  intellect,  namely 
controlling  power,  disparity  of  men  4s  clear  and  evident.  For 
instance  the  power  of  control  of  appetite  and  sexual  passion  is 
different  in  different  individuals  even  it  is  different  in  the  same 
individual  at  different  stage  of  life.  A  wise  man  will  be  able  to 
overcome  appetite  more  easily  than  an  ignorant  and  illiterate 
man.  A  young  man  may  fail  to  overcome  sexual  appetite  but 
when  he  grows  old,  he  is  able  to  do  it. 

The  disparity  is  also  due  to  the  differences  in  knowledge  of  a 
subject.  Thus  a  man  having  special  knowledge  of  medicines  may 
refrain  from  some  harmful  foods  whil  a  lay  man  fails  to  do  that 
simply  because  he  lacks  in  medical  knowledge.  Similarly  a 
learned  man  is  more  competent  to  give  up  sin  than  an  ignorant 
man. 

-O- 


CHAPTER  II 
SECTION  1 

FOUNDATION  OF  BELIEF 

Praise  be  to  God,  the  Creator,  the  First,  the  Last,  the  Doer  of 
whatever.  He  wills,  who  guides  His  servants  towards  the  true 
path,  who  makes  Himself  known  to  men  that  He  exists  by 
Himself  without  any  partner,  He  is  single  without  any  associate, 
the  Eternal  without  any  before  Him  and  without  any  beginning, 
the  Everlasting  without  any  end.  He  is  the  First,  the  Last,  the 
External  and  the  Internal,  the  Al-Knowing.  The  following  beliefs 
about  God  is  necessary. 

(1)  To  believe  in  His  Transcendence.  He  is  without  body 
and  form,  free  of  restriction,  limitation  and  resemblance,  not 
divisible.  Nothing  is  like  Him  and  He  is  not  like  anything.  He  is 
not  limited  by  measure,  space  and  time.  He  is  free  from  diligence, 
rest  and  change.  Everything  is  in  His  grasp.  He  is  above  Arsn, 
above  heaven  and  above  everything.  He  is  nevertheless  below 
the  deepes  t  depth.  Yet  He  is  near,  very  close  to  a  thing,  nearest  to 
the  jugular  Vein  of  a  man.  He  fs  not  in  anything  and  nothing  is  in 
Him.  He  is  beyond  space  and  beyond  time.  He  is  now  as  He  was 
before.  He  expresses  Himself  through.  His  creatures  and  not  by 
existence.  He  is  free  from  change,  increase  or  decrease. 

(2)  To  believe  in  His  power  and  existence.  He  is  Everliving, 
Al-  powerful,  Almighty,  the  great  Destroyer.  He.is  free  from 
faults  and  failures,  slumber,  sleep,  disease,  death.  He  is  the  Lord 
of  the  entire  universe,  angles  and  of  everything.  The  heavens  are 
rolled  in  His  hands.  He  is  unique  in  creation  and  unrivalled  in 
ever  new  creations.  He  fixed  the  provision  and  death  of  created 
being  and  nothing  can  escape  from  His  power.  His  power  and 
might  are  above  counting. 

(3)  To  believe  in  His  Knowledge.  His  knowledge  is  without 
limit  and  He  knows  everything.  Whatever  happens  between  the 
deepest  abyss  of  the  earth  to  the  highest  heaven  is  within  His 
knowledge.  The  smallest  atom  in  the  earth  or  in  heaven  is  not 
outside.  His  knowledge.  He  knows  the  creeping  of  an  ant  and  on 
a  solid  stone  in  intense  dark  night  or  in  the  movement  of  a  moste 
in  the  air.  Everyting  open  and  secret  Is  within  His  knowledge  : 
Every  thought  in  mind,  every  contrivance  of  the  devil  and  every 


100  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

thought  good  or  bad  is  within  His  knowledge.  His  knowledge  is 
eternal  and  unlimited  without  any  increase  or  decrease  and 
without  any  defect. 

(4)  To  believe  in  His  will.  Nothing  comes  into  being  small  or 
great,  good  or  evil,  benefitting  or  not  benefitting,  faith  or 
infidelity,  known  or  unknown,  profit  or  loss,  sin  or  virtue 
without  His  order,  power  and  will.  What  He  will  comes  into 
being.  What  He  does  not  will  comes  not  into  being.  Not  a  glance 
of  the  eye,  not  a  stray  sudden  thought  in  mind  is  outside  His  will. 
He  does  what  He  wills.  There  is  none  to  rescind  His  command, 
there  is  no  obstacle  to  it.  There  is  no  refuge  of  one  who  is 
disobedient  to  him.  There  is  none  to  follow  Hit  command 
without  His  will.  If  mankind,  jinn,  angels  and  devil  want  to 
remove  an  atom  from  its  proper  place,  they  won't  be  able  to  do  it 
without  His  will.  His  will  lies  naturally  in  His  attributes  which 
are  unlimited.  There  is  no  precedence  or  subsequence  of  any 
event  from  its  appointed  time. 

(5)  To  believe  in  His  hearing  and  sight.  He  hears  and  sees. 
His  hearing  and  sight  are  all  pervading.  Nothing  however  scanty 
can  escape  His  hearing  and  nothing  however  subtle  can  go  from 
His  sight.  Distance  is  no  bar  to  His  hearing  and  seeing,  rather 
distance  and  nearness  are  all  equal  to  Him.  Darkness  can  not 
obstruct  His  sight.  He  sees  without  eyes,  cathces  without  hand 
and  creates  without  instrument.  His  attributes  are  not  like  those 
of  the  created  beings  as  His  being  is  not  like  that  of  the  created. 

(6)  To  believe  in  His  words.  God  speaks  without  sound.  It  is 
eternal,  ancient  and  self-existing  unlike  the  talks  of  the  created. 
His  talk  is  without  sound.  It  has  got  no  connection  with 
circulation  of  air.  It  does  not  take  the  help  of  words  and 
languages  through  the  movement  of  lips.  The  Quran,  the  Bible, 
the  Gospel  and  Psalms  are  His  created  books  to  His  Prophets.  The 
Quran  is  recited  by  tongue,  written  in  papers  and  preserved  in 
heart,  nevertheless  it  is  eternal  existing  with  the  eternity  of  God. 
Hazrat  Moses  heard  His  words  without  sound  and  language  and 
the  righteous  will  see  Him  in  the  hereafter  without  body  and 
space. 

(7)  To  believe  in  His  actions.  There  is  no  creator  of  actions 
except  He  and  nobody  is  outside  His  judgment.  He  created 
everything  in  its  best  of  make  and  form  and  no  other  form  is 


Vol-I  FOUNDATION  OF  BEI^EF  101 

better  that  in.  He  is  wise  in  His  actions  and  just  in  His  judgments. 
His  justice  is  not  comparable  to  that  of  men.  Whatever  exists  in 
the  world,  men,  jinn,  angels  devils,  heaven,  earth,  animals, 
plants,  inanimate  things  comes  out  of  nothing  but  by  His  power. 
He  existed  in  eternity  by  Himself  and  there  was  nothing  along 
with  Him.  Tereafter  He  originated  creations  not  because  of  His 
necessity.  He  has  got  no  fatigue  or  languor.  Whatever  He  does  is 
from  a  sense  of  justice,  not  of  oppression  or  injustice.  Obedience 
to  Him  is  binding  on  all  His  creatures  and  He  expressed  it 
through  His  Prophets.  He  gave  them  miracles  and  conveyed  His 
injunctions  and  prohibitions  through  them. 

(8)  To  believe  in  the  other  words.  It  is  to  attest  to  the 
prophethood  of  Muhammad.  God  sent  the  unlettered  Quraishite 
Prophet  Mahammad  as  an  apostle  to  all  the  Arabs  and 
non- Arabs,  to  the  jinn  and  men  and  by  his  law  he  abrogated  all 
other  laws.  He  gave  him  superiority  to  all  other  Prophets  and 
made  him  leader  of  mankind  and  did  not  make  complete  any 
faith  with  the  words  of  Tauhid  till  it  was  followed  by  the 
attestation  that  Muhammad  is  His  servant  and  apostle.  He  made 
compusolory  to  believe  whatever  he  said  about  this  world  and 
the  next  world.  He  does  not  accept  the  faith  of  a  man  unless  he 
believes  in  these  articles  of  faith  along  with  the  following. 

(a)  To  believe  in  Munkar  and  Nakir.  They  are  two  terrible 
angles.  They  will  make  the  dead  one  sit  up  with  his  soul  and  body 
and  ask  him  about  his  religion  and  his  Prophet.  This  is  the  first 
examination  after  death,  (b)  To  believe  in  the  punishment  of 
grave  as  true,  (c)  to,  believe  in  the  Balance  with  two  scales  and  a 
tongue  the  magnitude  of  which  is  like  the  stages  of  heaven  and 
earth.  Therewith  the  actions  of  men  will  be  weighed.  The  weight 
would  be  like  a  mote  or  mustard  seed  to  establish  exact  justice, 
(d)  To  believe  in  the  Bridge.  It  is  a  bridge  stretched  ever  Hell, 
sharper  than  the  edge  of  the  sword  and  thinner  than  a  hair.  The 
feet  of  the  unbelievers  will  slip  and  they  will  fall  down  into  Hell. 
The  feet  of  the  believers  will  be  firm  upon  it  by  the  Grace  of  God 
and  so  they  will  cross  it  to  paradise,  (e)  To  believe  in  the 
Fountain.  It  is  a  fountain  of  the  Prophet.  The  believers  will  take 
drink  from  it  and  enter  paradise  after  crossing  the  bridge. 
Whoever  will  drink  therefrom  once  will  never  be  thirsty.  Its 
water  "will  be  whiter  than  milk  and  sweeter  than  honey.  There 
wiH  be  so  many  pitchers  around  like  so  many  stars  in  firmament. 


102  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

(f)  To  believe  in  the  judgment.  Some  will  render  little  account, 
some  great  and  some  will  enter  paradise  without  account.  They 
will  be  in  the  neighborhood  of  God.  Those  who  believe  in  Tauhid 
will  come  out  of  Hell  after  their  due  punishment  in  Hell,  (g)  To 
believe  in  the  intercession  of  the  Prophets  then  the  learned,  then 
the  martyrs,  then  the  rest  of  the  believers.  They  will  have  the 
right  of  intercession  in  proportion  to  their  ranks  to  God.  (h)  To 
believe  in  the  goodness  of  the  companions,  first  of  Abu  Bakr,  then 
of  Omar,  then  of  Osman  and  then  of  Ali.  You  will  have  good  idea 
about  them  and  praise  them  as  God  and  His  Apostle  praised 
them. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  BELIEF 

What  has  been  said  above  about  belief  is  applicable  to  a  boy 
in  his  early  years  in  order  than  he  may  commit  them  to  memory. 
,  Its  meaning  will  be  gradually  unfolded  to  him.  The  first  duty  of  a 
*boy  is  to  commit  them  to  memory,  then  to  understand  them  and 
then  to  believe  them  and  then  to  know  them  as  certain  and  sure.  It 
comes  to  his  mind  as  a  matter  of  course  without  proof.  The  root  of 
faith  of  the  ordinary  people  is  Taqlid  or  blind  belief  on  authority. 
True  it  is  that  the  belief  which  is  based  on  authority,  is  not  free 
from  some  weakness,  but  when  it  is  certain  and  sure,  it  becomes 
perfect.  To  achieve  this  end,  one  should  not  resort  to  scholastic 
theology  but  to  reading  the  Quran,  Tafsir  and  Hadis  and  to 
understand  their  meaning  because  in  that  case  the  light  of  divine 
service  appears  in  him,  and  the  advices  of  the  pious,  their 
company,  their  character  arid  conduct,  their  God-  fear  and  their 
asceticism  spread  effect  in  his  mind.  Instruction  to  the  boy  is  like 
the  sowing  of  seed  in  his  heart.  The  above  actions  are  like  the 
serving  of  water  and  tending  the  seed.  It  grows,  becomes  strong 
and  thrives  in  to  a  tree  and  its  root  becomes  strong  and  firm  and 
its  branches  rise  high.  The  boy  should  also  be  guarded  against 
argumentation  and  speculation  as  their  harms  are  greater  than 
their  benefits.  To  make  faith  strong  by  argumentation  is  like 
striking  a  tree  with  an  iron  matter.  To  teach  by  proof  is  one  thing 
and  and  to  see  proof  by  eyes  is  another  thing.  It  the  boy  wants  to 
be  included  within  the  travellers  of  the  hereafter  with  Taufiq  or 
God's  grace  as  his  friend,  the  doors  of  guidance  are  opened  up  for 
him  till  he  remains  engaged  in  actions  attached  to  God-fear  and 
restrains  himself  from  passions  and  lusts  making  efforts  in 
discipline  and  self  mortification.  Owing  to  these  efforts,  a  light 


Vol-I  FOUNDATION  OF  BELIEF  103 

from  God  falls  in  his  heart  as  God  says:  Whose  strives  for  Us,  We 
shall  guide  them  in  our  paths,  for  God  in  assuredly  with  those 
who  do  right  — 29:69Q.  That  is  the  most  valuable  jewel  and  the 
ultimate  goal  of  the  saints  and  favourites  of  God.  That  is  the 
secret  matter  which  rested  in  the  breast  of  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  and 
for  which  he  was  superior  to  all  others.  The  expression  of  this 
secrecy  has  got  different  stages.  II  will  be  open  to  one  in 
proportion  to  ones  efforts  and  strivings  and  the  more  one  makes 
his  soul  clean  and  pure.  It  is  like  the  learning  of  the  mysteries  of 
medicines,  jurisprudence  and  other  science.  They  differ  in 
proportion  to  the  differences  of  intellect  and  knowledge.  As  there 
is  no  limit  to  these  stages,  there  is  also  no  limit  to  the  degrees  of 
secrets. 

— O— 
SECTION  3 

PROOF  OF  BELIEF 

Iman  or  belief  is  founded  upon  four  pillars,  each  of  which  has 
got  ten  bases. 

(1 )  FIRST  PILLAR:  It  is  the  knowledge  of  essence  of  God  and 
it  is  established  upon  ten  bases.  They  are  the  knowledge  and 
belief  that  God  is  existing,  eternal,  ancient,  without  form, 
without  body,  without  length  and  breadth,  without  any  special 
direction,  occupying  no  space,  object  of  vision  of  the  next  world 
and  He  is  one  without  any  partner. 

(2)  SECOND  PILLAR:  It  is  to  have  knowledge  of  His 
attributes  and  to  believe  them.  It  is  founded  on  ten  bases — He  is 
Al-  powerful,  Al-knowing.  living  for  ever,  willing,  hearing, 
seeing,  speaking,  eternal  in  words,  knowledge  and  will  and  free 
from  changes  of  events. 

(3)  THIRD  PILLAR:  It  is  to  have  knowledge  and  faith  in  His 
works  which  are  established  over  ten  bases.  They  are  that  men's 
actions  are  created,  willed  and  fixed  by  God,  that  He  is  kind  to 
creatures  free  from  imposing  works  beyond  power  of  men,  that 
He  punishes  men,  does  what  He  wills,  that  there  is  nothing 
obligatory  on  Him,  that  He  sent  apostles  and  that  our  Prophet 
was  helped  by  miracles  and  that  his  prophethood  will  last  rill  the 
day  of  Resurrection. 


104  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

(4)  FOURTH  PILLAR:  It  is  to  believe  in  the  things  accepted 
on  authority  and  it  is  based  on  ten  things.  It  is  to  believe  in  the 
truth  of  Resurrection,  questions  by  Munkar  and  Nakir, 
punishment  of  grave,  the  Balance,  the  Bridge,  Paradise,  Hell,  the 
true  Imams,  excellence  of  the  companions  in  accordance  with 
chronological  order  and  qualifications  of  being  an  Imam. 

FIRST  PILLAR 
The  basic  principles  of  faithfor  knowledge  of  God 

(1)  The  first  basic  principle  is  to  have  knowledge  of  the 
existence  of  God.  The  first  light  which  illuminess  faith  and  the 
first  thing  to  be  followed  is  the  Quran  and  there  is  no  word  better 
than  the  word  of  God.  God  says  :  Have  I  not  made  the  earth  a 
couch,  mountains  its  tents?  I  have  created  you  of  two  sexes  and 
ordained  your  sleep  for  rest,  night  as  a  mantle  and  day  for 
gaining  livelieood.  I  created  above  you  seven  solid  heavens  and 
placed  therein  a  burning  lamp  and  I  sent  down  waters  in 
abundance  from  clouds  that  I  night  bring  forth  by  it  corns  and 
herbs  and  gardens  thick  with  trees — 78:6.  God  says :  In  the  creation 
of  the  heaven  and  the  earth  and  in  the  alternation  of  night  and  day 
and  in  the  ships  which  pass  throught  the  sea  with  what  is  useful  to 
man  and  in  the  rain  which  God  sends  down  from  heaven,  giving  life 
by  it  to  the  earth  after  its  death  and  by  sacttering  over  all  kinds  of 
earth  and  in  the  change  of  the  winds  and  in  the  clouds  that  are  made 
to  do  service  between  heaven  and  earth,  are  signs  for  those  who 
understand — 2:159.  God  says  :  Don't  you  see  how  God  created  the 
seven  heavens  one  over  the  other,  placed  therein  the  moon  as  a  light 
and  the  sun  as  a  torch  and  God  caused  you  to  spring  forth  from  the 
earth  like  a  plant.  He  will  turn  you  back  in  to  it  again  and  will  bring 
you  forth  again — 71 : 1 4  God  said  :  Don' t  you  see  the  germ  of  life?  Is  i  t 
you  who  created  it  or  I?  I  have  decred  death  among  you  and  1  shall 
not  be  overcome  to  change  you  forms  and  create  you  what  you 
know  not — 56:58: 

It  is  clear  that  if  he  who  has  got  a  little  intellect  and  ponders 
over  these  verses  and  looks  to  the  wonderful  creations  of  the. 
heavens  and  the  earth  will  realise  that  without  a  great  Designer 
these  workmanships  are  impossible.  The  human  soul  naturally 
testifies  that  God  exists  and  that  everything  is  governed  by  His 
Laws.  For  this  reason  God  says  :  Is  there  any  doubt  about  God, 
the  Creator  of  heavens  and  earth  (14:11)?  The  Prophets  were 


Vol-I  FOUNDATION  OF  BELIEF  105 

therefore  sent  by  Him  to  call  the  people  towards  monotheism 
there  is  no  deity  but  Got'.  They  were  not  commanded  to  say  :  For 
us  there  is  one  God  and  for  the  world  another  God,  because  such 
a  thing  was  inborn  in  their  minds  from  the  time  of  their  births. 
God  said.  If  you  ask  them  who  has  created  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  they  will  reply  'God'.  God  said  :  Turn  your  face  then 
towards  the  true  faith,  the  natural  religion  whereon  God  created 
men — 30:30.  There  fore  there  are  testimonies  of  the  Quran  and 
human  nature  which  are  sufficient  proofs.  All  other  proofs  are 
unnecessary  but  still  we  shall  prove  by  the  proof  of  knowledge 
that  God  exists. 

PROOF  OF  KNOWLEDE 

A  new  thing  cannot  come  into  existence  without  a  cause. 
The  would  is  an  originated  new  thing  and  it  did  not  come  into 
existence  without  a  cause.  That  a  thing  cannot  come  into 
existence  without  a  cause  is  clear,  for  such  a  thing  belongs  to  a 
certain  definite  time  and  it  also  comes  to  our  intellect  that  it 
comes  at  a  fixed  time  without  precedence  or  subsequence, 
because  of  the  urgency  of  its  fixed  time.  The  world  is  a  new  or 
orginated  thing.  Its  proof  is  found  in  the  fact  that  it  is  not  free 
from  motion  and  rest  which  are  the  characteritics  of  every  new 
material  thing.  Even  motion  and  rest  are  two  new  orignated 
things  not  free  from  changes.  The  world  and  whatever  exists  in 
it  are  originated  things.  There  are  three  matters  in  this 
argument.  Firstly,  a  body  is  not  free  from  motion  and  rest.  It 
requires  no  meditation.  Secondly,  motion  and  rest  themselves 
are  originated  things.  Its  proof  is  that  one  comes  after  another. 
It  is  found  in  all  bodies.  What  is  static  can  move  and  what  is 
moving  can  become  static  according  to  the  dictates  of  intellect. 
If  any  of  the  above  two  things  is  predominant  over  the  body,  it 
becomes  a  new  event.  A  new  thing  is  originated  because  of  its 
emergence  an  old  thing  is  distant  because  of  its  extinction.  If 
the  eternity  of  a  thing  is  established,  its  extinction  is 
impossible  as  we  shall  prove  it  by  the  subsistence  of  the 
creation.  Thirdly,  what  is  not  free  from  changes  is  an 
originated  or  new  thing  or  whatever  is  not  indepedent  of 
originated  things  is  itself  originated.  Its  proof  is  that  if  it  were 
not  so,  the  world  before  every  new  thing  may  change  which 
has  got  no  beginning  and  unless  these  new  things  come  to 
nought,  the  turn  for  the-present  new  things  to  come  into  being 


106  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

would  never  come.  But  it  is  impossible  for  a  thing  which  has  no 
end  to  come  to  nought. 

Another  reason  is  that  if  there  is  no  end  of  the  motion  of 
heavenly  bodies,  three  conditions  would  arise  — their  numbers 
would  be  either  odd  or  even,  or  both  odd  and  even  or  neither  odd 
or  even.  The  last  two  are  impossible,  as  positive  and  negative  are 
united  therein,  since  the  affirmation  of  one  is  the  negation  of 
another  and  negation  of  one  is  the  affirmation  of  another.  They 
cannot  be  even,  as  even  number  comes  odd  by  the  addition  of 
one.  That  which  has  no  end  cannot  be  even  without  change.  They 
cannot  be  odd,  because  the  number  becomes  even  with  the 
addition  of  one.  How  can  it  change  into  odd  when  its  number  has 
got  no  end?  They  cannot  be  even  or  odd  as  it  has  got  no  end .  From 
this,  it  is  concluded  that  the  world  is  not  free  from  changes  and 
therefore  it  is  an  originated  thing.  When  it  is  an  originated  thing, 
it  requires  a  Creator  to  bring  it  into  existence. 

(2)  The  second  basic  principle  is  the  knowledge  that  God  is 
eternal.  He  has  got  no  beginning  and  no  end.  He  is  the  final  of 
everything  and  before  everything  living  or  dead.  Its  proofis  this. 
If  He  were  an  originated  thing  and  not  eternal.  He  would  have 
need  of  a  Creator  who  would  also  have  need  of  a  Creator.  Thus  it 
would  have  continued  without  end.  Whatever  comes  in 
succession  ends  in  an  ancient  creator  which  is  the  first.  For  this 
reason,  the  Creator  is  the  First  and  the  Last,  the  Creator  of  the 
world  and  its  Fashioner. 

(3).  Third  basic  principle.  It  is  that  God  is  everlasting 
wihtout  end.  He  is  the  first  and  the  last,  the  open  and  the  secret. 
When  the  attribute  of  eternity  has  been  established,  his  end 
becomes  impossible.  Its  proof  is  this.  If  He  had  an  end,  He  would 
have  remained  in  two  conditions,  either  he  would  come  to 
nought  by  Himself  or  through  an  oposing  annihilating  agent.  If  it 
is  possible  for  a  thing  which  is  self-existing  to  come  to  nought,  it 
is  also  possible  for  that  thing  to  come  into  existence.  The  reason  is 
that  if  a  thing  requires  a  cause  to  come  to  existence,  it  also 
requires  a  cause  to  come  to  nought.  It  is  not  possible  that  a  thing 
comes  to  nought  after  meeting  with  an  opposing  agent.  If  that 
thing  which  comes  to  nought  is  eternal,  how  does  the  form  of 
existence  of  a  thing  become?  It  is  not  also  possible,  than  an 
originated  thing  coming  before  an  eternal  thing  loses  its  identity 
and  existence.  God  is  eternal  as  we  have  learnt  it  from  previous 


Vol-I  FOUNDATION  OF  BELIEF  107 

discussions.  How  then  did  He  exist  in  eternity  with  His  opposite? 
If  the  opposite  is  an  originated  thing,  its  existence  from  eternity  is 
impossible. 

(4)  Fourth  basic  principle.  It  is  that  God  is  wihtout  form  not 
occupying  any  space  and  free  from  space,  motion  and  rest.  Its 
proof  is  this.  Every  form  occupies  a  space  and  moves  and  stays  in 
it.  Body  has  got  motion  and  rest  which  are  the  characterof 
originated  things.  What  is  not  free  from  changes  is  an  originated 
thing.  If  any  form  is  limited  by  space  and  is  eternal,  it  is 
understood  that  the  sustance  of  the  creation  of  the  world  is 
eternal.  If  a  man  says  that  God  has  got  body  and  occupies  space, 
he  commits  blunder  for  using  such  word  and  not  for  its  meaning. 

(5)  Fifth  basic  principle.  It  is  that  ood  is  not  comoposed  of 
abody  having  different  substances.  When  He  does  not  occupy 
any  space,  He  has  got  no  body  as  every  body  is  limited  by  space 
and  composed  of  different  substances.  The  substances  of  the 
body  are  not  free  from  division,  composition,  motion,  rest,  form 
and  quantity.  These  are  the  qualities  of  an  originated  thing.  If  it 
were  possible  to  believe  that  the  Creator  of  the  world  has  got  a 
body,  then  it  would  be  possible  to  attribute  divinity  of  the  sun 
and  the  moon  and  other  heavenly  bodies.  If  a  designer  wishes  to 
make  a  body  without  the  substance  of  body,  he  will  commit 
mistake. 

(6)  Sixih  basic  principle.  God  has  got  no  length  and  breadth 
as  these  are  attributes  of  a  body  which  is  an  originated  thing.  Its 
Creater  exised  from  before  it.  So  how  would  He  enter  in  a  body  as 
He  existed  by  Himself  before  all  originated  things  and  there  was 
nobody  along  with  Him.  He  is  Alknowing,  Almighty,  Willing 
creator.  These  attributes  are  impossible  for  a  body.  He  is  not  like 
any  worldly  thing,  rather  He  is  ever-living,  ever-lasting  and 
noting  is  like  Him.  Where  is  the  similarity  of  the  Creator  with  the 
created,  the  Fashioner  with  the  fashioned?  Hence  it  is  impossible 
that  anything  is  like  Him. 

(7)  Seventh  basic  principle.  It  is  that  God  is  not  confined 
within  any  direction  as  he  created  direction,  either  above  or 
below,  right  or  left,  front  or  behind.  He  created  two  directions  for 
man,  one  rests  on  earth  called  the  direction  of  feet  and  one  above 
his  head.  What  rests  above  head  is  above  and  what  rests  below 
feet  is  below.  To  an  ant,  below  the  roof,  the  above  portion  is  it 


108  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

lower  side  and  the  lower  side  is  it  upper  side;  though  they  are 
contrary  in  our  case.  He  created  for  man  two  hands,  one  right 
hand  and  another  left.  Accordingly  there  is  right  hand  direction 
and  the  left  hand  direction.  Then  there  are  front  direction  and 
back  direction.  When  direction  is  an  originated  thing,  how  can 
He  be  governed  by  that  ?  Along  with  the  creation  of  men, 
directions  have  been  created.  There  is  nothing  above  God, 
because  He  has  got  no  head  and  the  word  'above'  is  connected 
with  head.  There  is  noting  below  Him  as  the  word  'below'  is 
conneted  with  feet  and  God  has  no  feet.  If  He  is  above  the  world, 
there  is  a  direction  opposite  to  it  and  every  opposite  thing  has  got 
a  body  like  it  or  similar  to  it.  But  God  is  free  from  it.  He  is  unique, 
He  is  the  Designer. 

(8)  Eighth  basic  principle.  It  is  that  "od  is  soated  upon  His 
Throne,  that  is  upon  power.  It  is  not  inconsistet  with  the  attribute 
of  His  grandeur  and  the  symptoms  of  origination  and 
annihilation.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  the  following  verse  of  the 
Quran  :  Then  He  ascended  to  heaven  and  it  was  then  but 
smoke — 41  :  10.  It  means  his  dominion  and  power  as  the  poet 
said  :- 

Bishr  has  gained  power  in  Iraq. 
Without  sword  and  shedding  blood. 

The  people  of  truth  accepted  this  interpretation  as  the  people 
of  untruth  were  compelled  to  accept  the  interpretation  of  these 
words  of  God  :  He  is  with  you  wherever  you  are  (57:4).  This 
means  that  He  encompasses  everything.  This  is  supported  by  the 
following  Hadis  :  The  hea  '  of  a  believer  in  is  with  two  fingers  of 
the  Merciful,'  meaning  within  His  power  or  might.  It  is  also 
supported  by  the  following  Hadis  :  "The  Block  stone  is  the  right 
hand  of  God  in  the  earth,'  meaning  it  is  established  on  honour  in 
the  earth.  If  its  meaning  is  taken  literally,  the  result  would  be 
impossible.  His  taking  rest  on  the  Throne  means  this.  If  it  is  taken 
literally,  it  becomes  possible  to  believe  that  He  has  got  a  bod  v  and 
the  Throne  is  also  a  body  limited  by  space.  It  is  impossible. 

(9)  Ninth  basic  principle.  It  is  that  although  God  is  free  from 
form,,  space  and  direction.  He  is  an  object  to  be  seen  in  the 
hereafter  as  He  said  :  On  that  day  shall  faces  beam  with  light 
looking  towards  their  Lord — 75  :  22.  He  is  not  visible  in  this 
world  as  God  said  :  Vision  does  not  comprehend  Him,  but  He 


Vol-I  FOUNDATION  OF  BELIEF  109 

comprehends  vision — 6 :  103;  also  because  of  the  following  verse: 
God  addressed  Moses  saying :  You  cannot  see  Me — 7 :  139. 1  don' t 
understand  how  the  Mutazalites  hold  that  God  is  visible  in  this 
world  also  though  Moses  could  not  see  Him.  Insight  is  a  kind  of 
Kashf  and  knowledge,  and  Kashf  is  more  clear  than  knowledge. 
When  God  has  got  connection  with  knowledge  and  not  with 
direction,  He  has  got  connection  also  with  insight  without  any 
direction.  As  God  sees  His  creation  though  not  in  front,  the 
creation  also  sees  Him  though  not  in  fornt.  As  it  is  possible  to 
know  Him  without  modiality  or  form,  it  is  also  possible  to  see 
Him  likewise. 

(10)  Tenth  basic  principle.  It  is  that  God  is  one  without  any 
partner,  single  without  any  like.  He  is  unique  in  every  new 
creations,  innovations,  and  inventions.  There  is  nothing  like 
Him.  The  Quran  says :  Had  there  been  any  other  god  therein,  they 
would  have  gone  to  ruin — 21  :  22.  If  the  first  God  willed 
something,  the  second  would  have  been  compelled  to  him.  This 
means  that  he  would  have  no  supreme  power.  If  the  second  is  to 
oppose  the  first,  he  would  be  powerful  and  the  first  would  be 
weak  rather  than  an  almighty  God. 

SECOND  PILLAR  OF  FAITH 
God's  attributes  based  on  ten  principles. 

(1)  First  basic  principle.  It  is  that  God  is  Almighty  as  He  said: 
He  is  powerful  over  all  things — 15  :  120.  He  is  truthful  as  the 
world  is  perfect  with  His  designs  and  well  regulated.  He  who 
sees  a  garment  of  silk  of  which  the  weaving  and  texture  are  fine 
and  says  that  it  has  been  made  by  a  dead  man  or  a  man  who  has 
got  no  power,  would  be  lacking  in  natural  intellect  and  is  utterly 
foolish. 

(2)  Second  basic  principle.  It  is  that  whatever  exists  is  within 
His  knowledge  and  under  His  control.  Even  an  atom  in  heaven 
and  earth  is  not  outside  His  knowledge.  He  is  truthful  in  all  His 
promises  and  has  got  knowledge  of  everything.  This  is  attested 
by  the  verse  :  Does  He  not  know  who  has  created  ?  He  is  subtle, 
cognisant — 77  :  14.  Take  this  proof  by  your  intellect  that  there  is 
nothing  like  of  what  He  created  with  wonderful  design.  This 
shows  the  deep  knowledge  of  the  Designer  and  wonderful 
intricacies.  He  is  the  end  of  praise  and  guidance  as  He  described 
Himself. 


110  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

(3)  Third  basic  principle.  It  is  that  God  is  everyliving, 
because  it  has  been  established  that  He  has  got  knowledge  and 
power  and  that  He  has  got  life.  If  it  were  conceived  that  a 
powerful  and  knowing  designer  is  without  life,  then  it  is  possible 
also  to  doubt  the  lives  of  animals  inspite  of  their  motions  and 
rest.  This  is  height  of  foolishness. 

(4)  Fourth  basic  principle.  It  is  that  every  action  happens 
according  to  the  will  of  God.  In  other  words  every  existing  thing 
lives  according  to  His  will.  He  is  the  orignal  Creator  and  repeats 
creations  and  whatever  He  will,s  He  does.  When  every  action 
happens  according  to  His  will,  the  opposite  thing  also  comes  into 
being  according  to  His  will.So  power  leads  His  will  to  two 
different  directions. 

(5)  Fifth  basic  principle.  It  is  that  God  is  hearing  and  seeing 
and  it  is  impossible  to  evade  His  sight  and  hearing.  He  is  the 
bridge  of  mind  and  lies  secretly  in  thoughts  and  reflections.  The 
thinnest  sound  of  the  creeping  of  a  black  ant  on  a  solid  stone  in 
the  deep  darkest  night  does  not  evade  His  hearing.  How  will  it 
not  be  when  His  sight  and  hearing  are  perfect  beyond  doubt  and 
there  is  no  decrease  of  this  power?  How  can  the  power  of  the 
created  become  perfect  in  relation  to  the  power  of  God?  How  can 
a  designer  become  perfect  in  relation  to  the  great  Designer?  How 
can  a  portion  become  equal  to  one  whole? 

(6)  Sixth  basic  principle  It  is  that  God  speaks  without  words 
and  sounds  and  letters.  It  does  not  resemble  the  speech  of  other 
beings.  In  reality  His  speech  is  speech  of  the  mind.  Just  as  speech 
of  mind  has  got  no  sound  or  words,  so  His  speech  has  got  no 
sound  or  words.  A  poet  says:- 

Speech  is  of  the  mind 
Tongue  is  the  vehicle  of  mind. 

He  who  cannot  conceive  it  is  a  fool.  Pay  no  attention  to  one 
who  does  not  understand  that  the  eternal  is  that  before  which 
nothing  existed.  Thus  in  the  word,  'Bismillah'  the  word  'B' ' 
precedes  'S'  and  consequencty  'S'  cannot  be  eternal.  God  has  got 
a  secret  for  leading  some  men  astray  as  He  says  :  There  is  no 
guide  for  one  whom  God  misguides — 13  :  33.  Whose  thinks  it 
impossible  that  the  Prophet  Moses  heard  God's  words  which  had 
no  sound  or  words,  it  becomes  impossible  for  him  to  believe  that 
he  will  see  in  the  next  world  such  a  thing  as  has  got  no  body 


? 


Vol-I  FOUNDATION  OF  BELIEF  111 

though  he  understands  that  a  thing  can  possible  by  seen  which 
has  got  no  colour,  body  or  size,  even  though  he  has  not  seen  such 
a  thing.  Similarly  conceive  of  hearing  what  is  applicable  to  sight. 
If  you  understand  that  God  has  got  knowledge  of  everything, 
understand  it  also  that  along  with  His  being.  He  has  got  attribute 
of  speech.  Understand  also  that  all  the  words  represent  His 
speech.  If  it  is  possible  to  conceive  of  the  existence  of  the  seven 
heavens  Paradise  and  Hell  all  written  in  a  small  piece  of  paper 
and  that  Taqdir  of  men  is  preserved  in  the  minutest  part  of  heart 
and  seen  with  an  eyeball  without  the  things  existing  in  the  eye 
ball,  it  is  also  possible  to  concevie  of  the  speech  of  God  as  being 
read  with  tongue,  preserved  in  mind,  written  in  paper,  but  the 
essence  of  speech  does  not  come  down  on  these  things,  because  if 
it  comes  down  on  paper  on  account  of  writing,  then  the  essence  of 
fire  would  come  down  on  paper  on  account  of  its  writing  and 
would  burn  it. 

(7)  Seventh  basic  principle.  It  is  that  the  words  emanting 
from  God  are  eternal  along  with  His  attributes,  since  it  is 
impossible  that  He  is  subject  ot  change.  Rather  it  is  necessary  that 
His  attributes  should  become  eternal  as  His  being  is  eternal.  He  is 
without  change  and  without  novelty.  He  exists  with  His 
attribiutes  from  eternity.  What  is  not  free  from  change  is 
originated.  Origination  is  an  attribute  of  body  as  it  is  subject  to 
change  and  the  attribute  of  body  is  also  subject  to  change.  How 
can  the  Creator  be  sharer  with  it  in  the  attribute  of  change?  For 

"  this  it  can  be  said  that  He  is  eternal,  His  words  are  eternal  but  our 
words  and  sounds  are  new  and  originated. 

(8)  Eighth  basic  principle.  It  is  that  His  knowledge  is  eternal. 
Whatever  occurs  in  His  creation  is  within  His  knowledge  from 
eternity  and  not  his  new  knowledge.  Whenever  any  animal  is 
born.  His  knowledge  about  it  is  not  new  but  eternal  and  ancient. 
For  instance,  if  I  know  that  zaid  will  come  at  sun-use,  his  arrival 
at  sun-rise  and  to  welcome  him  would  be  owing  to  that 
foreknowledge  and  not  for  any  new  knowledge  The  eternal 
knowledge  of  God  should  be  understood  in  this  way. 

(9)  Ninth  basic  principle.  It  is  that  His  will  is  eternal.  His  will 
Jto  make  an  event  at  the  appointed  time  has  got  connection  with 
His  eternal  knowledge,  because  if  there  is  rise  of  a  new  will,  it 
remains  confined  to  the  place  of  event.  If  His  will  rises  in  another 
object  and  not  in  His  being.  He  cannot  will  just  as  you  can  not 


112  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

execute  an  action  which  is  not  in  yourself.  How  can  you  do  it 
when  it  depends  on  the  will  of  another  which  again  depends  on 
the  will  of  another  and  so  on  to  infinity  and  there  is  no  end  of  it.  If 
it  is  possible  for  a  will  to  come  into  being  without  another  will,  it 
would  be  possible  for  the  world  to  come  into  being  without  a 
will. 

(10)  Tenth  basisc  principle.  It  is  that  God  is  wise  by  His 
knowledge,  living  with  His  life,  mighty  with  His  power,  willing 
with  his  will,  speaking  with  His  words,  seeing  with  His  light  and 
hearing.  These  attributes  belong  to  His  eternal  attributes.  If  one 
says  that  He  is  wise  without  wisdom,  his  words  will  be  like  those 
of  a  man  who  says  that  he  is  wealthy  without  his  wealth,  learned 
without  his  learning  and  the  object  of  learning.  Learning,  object 
of  learning  and  the  learned  man  are  inseparable,  as  murder 
murderer  and  one  murdered  are  in  separable.  As  murder  can  not 
be  conceived  without  the  killer  and  one  killed  a  learned  man 
cannot  be  concevied  without  learning  and  an  object  of  learning. 

THIRD  PILLAR  OF  FAITH 
Knowledge  of  the  action  of  God  involving  ten  principles. 

(1)  First  basic  principle.  It  is  the  knowledge  that  every  event 
in  the  world  is  His  action,  creation  and  invention.  There  is  no 
creator  of  it  except  He.  He  well  regulated  the  creation  and  gave  it 
its  due  power  and  motion.  All  the  actions  of  His  servant  are  His 
creations  and  keep  connection  with  His  power,  confirming 
thereby  His  words-God  is  the  creator  of  everything — 9 :  102.  God 
created  you  and  what  you  make — 37  :  96.  Whatever  is  your 
conversation,  hidden  or  open,  He  truly  knows  the  innermost 
recess  of  your  hearts."  "What !  does  He  not  know  when  He  has 
created,  when  He  is  the  subtle,  the  cognisant"  He  ordered  men  to 
take  precaution  in  their  actions,  words,  secret  matters  and 
thoughts  as  He  knows  the  orientation  of  their  actions  and  gave 
proof  of  His  knowledge  by  creating  creations.  How  will  He  not 
be  the  Creator  of  the  actions  of  men  when  He-has  got  full  power 
without  any  decreae?  His  power  is  connected  with  the 
movements  of  men.  All  motions  are  similar  and  are  connected 
with  power  of  God.  What  then  would  prevent  its  connection  in 
the  case  of  some  actions  and  would  not  prevent  it  in  the  case  of 
other  actions  when  all  are  similar?  How  could  animals  be 
independent  of  the  Creator  when  the  wonderful  workmanship  of 
spiders,  bees  and  other  animals  amaze  the  wisest  and  intelligent 


Vol-I  FOUNDATION  OF  BELIEF  113 

minds?  Who  has  got  power  of  spaciality  in  these  creations  except 
God?  Then  animals  themselves  donot  know  of  the  benefits  they 
produce.  So  they  cannot  be  called  the  cause  of  workmanship 
Now  think  that  all  creations  bow  down  to  One  who  is  the  Creator 
of  the  heavens  and  the  earth. 

(2)  Second  basic  principle.  It  is  that  God  being  the  Creator  of 
the  power  of  men,  does  not  prevent  them  from  doing  voluntary 
actions  by  way  of  acquisition,  for  God  created  power  and  Lhe 
container  of  power,  choice  as  well  as  the  container  of  choice. 
Power  is  an  attribute  of  a  man  though  it  is  the  creation  of  God  and 
not  acquired  by  man.  Motion  is  also  the  creation  of  God  and  an 
attribute  of  man  acquired  on  the  strength  of  power,  because  the 
power  with  which  he  was  created  is  his  attribute,  but  motion  is 
connected  with  the  attribute  of  power  and  for  this  reason  of 
connection,  it  has  been  named  power  of  motion.  The  power  of 
motion  is  not  the  result  of  compulsior  on  any  man  as  he  can  move 
according  to  his  will  and  knows  the  difference  between 
compulsion  and  volition.  How  can  this  motion  be  his  creation 
when  he  does  not  know  the  different  parts  of  acquired  actions 
and  their  numbers?  When  these  two  matters  are  disproved, 
namely  the  matter  that  actions  are  the  result  of  compulsion  and 
the  matter  that  they  are  the  result  of  volition,  there  remains  the 
middle  position  which  is  this  that  actions  are  voluntary  in  a  fixed 
manner  through  power  of  God  by  invention  and  through  the 
power  of  a  man  by  acquisition.  God  has  no  necessity  of  keeping 
connection  with  the  container  of  power  in  the  matter  of  creation 
because  the  power  of  God  is  eternal  and  its  connection  with  the 
world  is  eternal. 

(3)  Third  basic  principle.  It  is  the  knowledge  that  though  the 
actions  of  man  are  his  acquisitions,  they  are  nevertheless  not 
outside  the  will  of  God.  Neither  a  twinkling  of  an  eye,  nor  a 
sudden  rise  of  thought  in  mind  in  the  visible  and  invisible  world 
occurs  except  through  His  order,  power  and  will.  Good  or  evil, 
benefit  or  loss,  belief  or  infidelity,  knowledge  or  ignorance, 
success  or  failure,  guidance  or  misguidance,  sin  or  virtue,  Shirk' 
or  Iman  come  from  Him.  There  is  none  to  reject  His  command, 
none  to  disobey  his  decree,  He  guides  whom  He  wishes  and 
misguides  whom  He  whishes.  There  is  none  to  question  Him  of 
what  He  does,  but  the  people  will  be  questioned  (21 :  33).  All  say : 
What  He'  wills  occur  and  what  he  does  not  will  does  not  occur. 


1 14  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

God  says  :  If  God  willed,  He  would  have  guided  all  men  aright  - 
1 3:30.  Had  I  wished,  I  would  have  given  every  soul  its  guidance  - 
31  :  13.  He  who  thinks  that  God  does  not  will  sins  and  evils  as 
they  are  evils  and  that  it  is  the  devil  who  wills  them  is  cursed. 
Tell  me  how  a  Muslim  can  deny  the  supreme  rule  of  God.  If  the 
power  of  a  village  chief  is  curtaited,  he  will  think  it 
dishonourable.  He  will  think  it  derogatory  to  his  position  if 
actions  are  conducted  according  to  the  wishes  of  his  enemy  in  the 
village.  The  result  will  be  that  many  will  be  out  of  his  control. 
Now  it  is  seen  that  evil  deeds  are  predominant  in  men.  If  every 
sin  is  done  against  the  will  of  God,  God's  helplessness  is  seen. 
When  it  is  established  that  all  actions  of  men  are  creations  of  God, 
it  follows  that  the  evil  actions  are  also  the  result  of  His  will. 

Question  may  be  asked  how  God  commands  to  do  what  He 
does  not  wish  and  how  He  prohibits  what  He  wishes.  In  reply  we 
shall  say  that  command  is  one  thing  and  will  is  another  thing. 
Thus  if  a  master  beats  his  salve,  the  ruler  rebukes  the  master  for 
beating  his  slave.  The  master  shows  reason  that  his  slave  does 
not  obey  him.  As  a  proof  he  orders  his  slave  to  arrange  the  bridle 
of  his  horse  before  the  ruler  though  he  knows  that  the  slave  will 
not  obey  it.  If  he  does  not  order  him,  his  objection  before  the  ruler 
does  not  stand  and  if  he  wishes  that  his  order  should  be  obeyed  it 
amounts  to  his  murder.  It  is  impossible. 

(4)  Fourth  basic  principle.  It  is  that  God  is  generous  in 
inflicting  trouble  on  men  by  His  commands.  Neither  creation, 
nor  imposition  of  obligations  is  necessary  for  Him  although  the 
Mutazalites  hold  that  they  were  necessary  for  the  welfare  of  men. 
But  this  is  impossible  since  He  is  the  only  being  to  enjoin  and 
prohibit.  How  will  it  be  limited  by  compulsion?  The  object  of 
compulsion  is  one  of  two  things,  such  a  work  which  if  given  up 
will  cause  harm  in  future  as  it  is  said  that  it  is  compulsory  on  men 
to  obey  God  who  will  punish  him  in  the  hearafter  by  the  fire  of 
Hell:  or  it  is  to  avoid  such  present  harm  which  is  injurious  as  it  is 
said  that  to  drinik  water  for  a  thirsty  man  is  compulsory  so  that 
he  may  not  die.  Secondly  it  is  such  a  work  the  negation  of  which 
seems  impossible.  Thus  it  is  said  that  the  existence  of  a  thing 
which  is  known  is  necessary  because  if  it  does  not  exist,  it 
becomes  an  impossibility.  If  it  occurs,  knowledge  becomes 
ignorance. 


Vol-I  FOUNDATION  OF  BELIEF  115 

(5  )  Fifth  basic  Principle.  It  is  that  God  can  inflict  on  man 
what  is  beyond  his  capacity.  It  were  not  possible,  it  would  have 
been  impossible  for  men  to  pray  for  removing  it.   The  people 
prayed  :  O  our  Lord,  lay  not  on  us  that  for  which  we  have  no  ' 
strength-2:246Q.  This  is  against  the  belief  of  the  Mutazalites. 

(6  )  Sixth  basic  Principle.  It  is  that  God  is  free  to  punish  a 
man  inspite  of  his  virtues  and  to  reward  a  man  inspite  of  his  sins. 
The  Mutazalites  hold  the  contrary  view.  God  has  got  freedom  of 
actions  among  His  servants  and  it  is  impossible  that  His  servants 
will  oppose  His  freedom.  Tyranny  means  to  dispossess  a  man 
from  his  possession  but  it  is  impossible  in  the  case  of  God  as  He 
does  not  dispossess  others  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  and  earth  is  His.  It  is  proved  by  this.  Slaughter  of 
animals  is  infliction  of  pain  on  animals  and  men.  Various 
tortures  inflicted  on  animals  have  not  been  proceded  by  any 
offence  or  crimes  committed  by  the  animals.  If  it  is  said  that  these 
animals  would  be  raised  up  again  and  awarded  for  this  which  is 
incumbent  upon  God,  then  we  would  say  that  every  ant  killed 
under  feet  and  every  bug  crushed  would  be  brought  back  to  life.  - 
It  would  violate  the  dictates  of  reason  and  law  as  nothing  is 
incumbent  upon  God.  _ 

.  (7 )  Seventh  basic  Principle.  It  is  that  God  does  with  regard 
to  men  what  He  wills  and  it  is  not  incumbent  on  Him  to  do 
whatever  is  good  for  them.  It  has  already  been  stated  that 
nothing  is  compulsory  on  God  but  His  dealings  are  not 
intelligible  to  men,  because  there  is  nobody  to  question  Hlim 
what  He  does  but  men  are  subject  to  questions.  The  Mutazalites 
say  that  it  is  incumbent  upon  God  to  do  whatever  is  salutary  for 
men. 

(8)  Eighth  basic  Principle.  It  is  that  to  have  knowledge  of 
God  and  to  obey  His  commands  are  compulsory  on  men,  not  on 
account  of  the  reason  as  the  Mutazatities  say,  but  on  account  of 
Shariat.  Shariat  declared  poisonous  serpents  beyond  death, 
while  reason  in  realising  that  what  Shariat  foretells  thinks  it 
possible  and  urges  that  precautions  should  be  taken  against'arty 
possible  punishment.  But  reason  itself  does  not  lead  to  that 
knowledge  of  harm.  If  a  man  warns  by  saying  :  A  lion  stands 
behind  you,  he  should  at  once  take  to  his  heels  without  searching 
reason. 


116  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

(9 )  Ninth  basic  Principal.  It  is  that  sending  Prophets  to  men 
is  not  impossible.  Some  say  that  there  had  been  no  use  in  sending 
-them,  because  reason  renders  it  unnecessary.  This  is  false, 
because  reason  does  not  support  the  actions  which  will  lead  to 
salvation  in  the  hearaf ter  just  as  it  does  not  guide  them  to  discuse 
the  medicines  which  are  useful  for  health.  The  necessity  of 
Prohets  for  men  is  like  that  of  the  physicians  for  men.  The 
integrity  of  the  physicians  is  known  by  experience  and  the 
truthness  of  the  Prophets  is  known  by  miracles. 

(10)  Tenth  basic  Principle.  It  is  that  God  sent  Muhammed  as 
the  last  Prophet  and  as  an  abrogator  of  all  previous  laws  of  the 
Jews,  Christians  and  the  Sabians  and  God  helped  him  with  opem 
miracles  and  wonderful  signs,  such  as  splitting  up  the  moon  into 
two  parts,  the  praise  of  the  pebbles  causing  the  mute  animals 
to  speak,  water  flowing  from  his  fingers  etc.  The  open  miracle 
with  which  he  guided  the  Arabs  is  the  Quran,  as  the  beauty  of 
the  language  throughout  the  Quran  is  unparalleled  and  the 
Arabs  could  not  surpass  it  inspite  of  their  eloquence  and 
rhetoric.  Though  the  Prophet  was  illeterate  and  did  not  learn 
how  to  read  and  write,  yet  God  informed  him  in  the  Quran 
about  the  histories  of  the  previous  nations.  The  informations 
which  he  gave  about  the  previous  nations  in  the  Quran  being 
an  illiterate  person,  the  prophecies  he  made  about  the  future 
events  and  the  clue  he  gave  to  the  unknown  things  are  his 
miracles.  For  instance  God  says  :  You  will  enter  the  sacred 
mosque  if  God  wills  having  your  heads  shaved  and  your  hair 
short — 48:27.  The  verse :  The  Romans  have  been  vanguished  in 
a  land  nearby  but  after  their  defeat  they  will  defeat  them  in  a 
few  years — 30:1.  The  object  of  these  verses  is  to  prove  the  truth 
of  the  messenger  of  God  by  miracles. 

FOURTH  PILLARS  OF  FAITH 

To  believe  the  Hadis  of  the  Prophet  involving 

ten  basic  Principles 

(1)  First  basic  Principle.  It  is  to  believe  in  the  Resurrection  of 
the  dead  and  the  Day  of  judgment  as  in  the  traditions.  It  is  a 
settled  fact  like  the  beginning  of  our  creation.  God  said  :  People 
say  :  Who  shall  give  life  to  bones  when  they  are  rotten?  Say,  He 
shall  give  life  to  them  who  gave  them  life  at  first — 36:78.  The 
beginning  of  creation  is  the  proof  of  its  resurrection.  God  said  : 
Your  creation  and  your  resurrection  are  like  a  single  soul — 31:27. 


Vol-I  FOUNDATION  OF  BELIEF  117 

Resurrection  is  the  second  stage  of  men  and  is  possible  like  the 
first  stage  of  creation. 

(2)  Second  basic  Principle.  It  is  the  question  of  Munkar  and 
Nakir  which  has  been  mentioned  in  traditions  and  therefore  to 
believe  it  is  compulsory.  The  second  life  will  be  in  such  a  place 
where  he  willbe  questiond.  This  is  possible  naturally,  as  the 
stillness  of  the  dead  man's  corpse  nor  its  failure  to  hear  the 
questions  put  to  it  will  refute  it,  bcause  a  sleeping  man  is  openly 
still  and  dead-like  but  his  soul  feels  pain  and  and  pleasure  at  that 
time  in  dream.  Its  effect  can  beseen  when  he  wakes  up  from  sleep. 
The  Prophet  used  to  hear  the  words  of  Gebriel  and  see  him  but 
the  men  surrounding  him  did  not  hear  his  words  or  see  him.  As 
Cod  did  not  give  them  such  power  of  sight  and  hearing,  they  did 
not  see  and  hear. 

(3)  Third  basic  Principle.  It  is  to  believe  in  the  punishment  of 
the  grave  as  it  have  come  in  Shariat.  God  said  :  They  will  be 
exposed  to  Me  morning  and  evening  and  on  the  Resurrection 
Day.  The  supporters  of  Pharaoh  will  be  given  severe 
punishment — 40:49.  This  is  possible  and  to  believe  it  is 
compulsory.  Animals  have  got  special  organs  to  feel  pains  and 
pleasure  even  though  they  are  eaten  by  ferocious  animals. 

(4)  Fourth  basic  Principle.  It  is  to  believe  that  the  Balance  is 
true.  God  said  :  I  will  set  up  just  balance  on  the  judgment  day- 
21:48.  God  said  :  Those  whose  balances  will  be  heavy  will  get 
salvation,  and  those  whose  balance  willbe  light  will  be  losers 

—  7:7. 

(5)  Fifth  basic  Principle.  It  is  to  believe  in  the  Bridge  which  is 
spread  on  the  back  of  Hell,  thinner  than  a  hair  and  sharper  than 
the  edge  of  a  sword.  God  said  :  Guide  them  to  the  bridge  of  Hell 
and  tell  them  to  wait  there,  as  they  will  be  questioned — 27:23.  It  is 
possible,  because  He  who  make  the  birds  fily  in  the  horizon  can 
take  the  people  to  travel  on  the  Bridge. 

(6)  Sixth  basic  Principle.  It  is  the  belief  that  Paradise  and 
Hell  have  been  created  by  God.  God  said :  Vie  in  haste  for  pardon 
of  your  Lord  and  a  Pradise,  vast  as  the  heavens  and  the  earth, 
prepared  for  those  who  fear  God — 3  :  127.  This  proves  that 
Pradise  and  Hell  are  crea  ted . 


118  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

(7)  Seventh  basic  Principle.  It  is  to  believe  that  the  rightful 
Imams  after  the  Prophet  are  Hazrats  Abu  Bakr,  then  Omar,  then 
Osma,  and  the  Ali  and  that  the  Prophet's  attention  was  not  upon 
any  particular  Imam.  As  to  the  struggle  which  took  place  between 
Muwayiah  and  AH,  it  was  the  result  of  differences  of  opinion  to 
discover  truth  by  Ijtehad.  Hazrat  Muwayiah  did  not  do  it  for 
leadership.  Hazrat  Ali  considered  that  the  mode  of  punishment  of 
the  murderers  of  Osman  was  to  be  belated  as  they  got  relations  in 
the  army.  Hazrat  Muwayiah  considered  that  their  arrest  was  better 
as  their  influence  might  help  further  blood-shed. 

(8)  Eighth  basic  Principle.  It  is  to  believe  the  excellence  of  the 
companions  in  accordance  with  their  chronological  order  in 
which  they  succeeded  the  Prophet  and  the  real  excellence  is  in 
the  sight  of  God  and  that  it  did  not  come  to  anybody  except  to  the 
Holy  Prophet.  Several  verses  to  that  effect  in  praise  of  the 
companions  were  revealed  and  there  are  a  number  of  traditions. 

(9)  Ninth  basic  Principle.  It  is  to  believe  that  an  Imam,  in 
addition  to  his  qualifications  of  his  being  a  Mulsim,  mature  and 
intelligent  must  have  five  other  qualities — (1)  he  must  be  a  male, 
(2)  he  must  be  a  God  fearing  man,  (3)  he  must  be  learned,  (4)  he 
must  be  competent,  (5)  he  must  belong  to  the  tribe  of  Quraish  as 
the  Prophet  said  :  The  leaders  are  from  the  Quraish.  When  these 
qualities  are  found  in  a  man,  he  is  fit  to  become  an  Iman  or  ruler 
provided  majority  of  the  people  swear  allegiance  to  him.  Those 
who  oppose  the  majority  of  the  people  are  rebels  and  it  is 
incumbent  to  bring  them  under  control. 

(10)  Tenth  basic  Principle.  It  is  that  if  a  man  who  is  invested 
with  the. power  of  rule  is  found  lacking  in  God  fear  and  learning 
and  if  there  is  fear  of  distrubance  and  trouble  in  case  of  his 
removal,  then  his  rule  will  stand,  because  if  he  is  removed,  two 
conditions  will  arise.  (1)  Another  man  will  be  reinstated  in  his 
place  or  the  post  will  remain  vacant.  In  the  first  case,  the  harms 
which  will  be  caused  to'  the  Muslims  in  general  will  be  greater 
than  the  harms  of  one  who  has  got  no  God  fear  and  learning  in 
him.  The  qualties  of  leadership  are  for  the  greater  good  of  the 
people. 

These  four  pillar  involving  forty  basic  principles  are  the 
articles  of  belief.  He  who  believes  in  these  things  follows  Ahle 
Sunnat  or  the  people  of  the  ways  of  the  Prophet. 


Vol-I  FOUNDATION  OF  BELIEF  119 

SECTION  4 

RULES  .  OF  ARTICLES  OF  BELIEF 

This  section  comprises  three  questions — (1)  significance  of 
the  words  'Belief  and  'Islam',  (2)  whether  belief  increases  and 
decreased,  (3)  and  the  meaning  of  'belief  according  to  the  early 
Muslim  sages. 

(1)  First  question.  There  is  difference  of  opinion  regarding 
the  meanings  of  Islam  and  Iman,  but  there  are  three  questions  in 
that  connection — (a)  literal  meanings  of  the  words  (b)  their 
technical  meaning  in  the  Quran  and  traditions  and  (c)  functions 
of  the  terms  according  to  jurisprudence. 

(a)  Literal  meanings.  Iman  means  belief  or  confirmation  of 
truth.  God  said  :  You  have  not  brought  faith  in  Me — 12  :  17, 
meaning  you  do  not  believe  Me  as  true.  Islam  means  submission 
and  surrender  and  avoidance  of  unbelief,  rebellion  and 
disobedience.  Heart  is  the  special  seat  of  Iman  or  confirmation  of 
truth  and  tongue  is  its  interpreter.  Islam  means  submission  and 
surrender  and  confirmation  by  tongue.  The  word  'Islam'  is  more 
comprehensive  and  'Iman'  is  a  special  term.  Iman  is  a  part  of 
Islam.  Iman  is  Islam,  but  every  Iman  is  not  Islam. 

(b)  The  second  question  relates  to  interpretation  of  the 
words  Iman  and  Islam.  Shariat  used  the  words  in  three  diffrent 
ways  both  (a)  in  one  meaning,  (b)  in  two  meanings,  or  (c)  in  two 
meanings  mixed  together,  (a)  The  one  meaning  is  supported  by 
the  verse :  I  have  taken  out  the  believers  who  were  in  the  city  and 
I  did  not  find  in  it  but  only  one  house  of  Muslims — 51 :  35.  In  fact 
there  was  only  one  family  of  Muslims.  God  said  :0  my  people,  if 
you  believe  God,  then  put  your  trust  in  Him  if  you  are 
Muslim — 10:84.  The  Prophet  said :  Islam  is  built  upon  five  pillars. 
He  answered  it  when  questiond  about  Iman.  (b)  As  to  the  two 
meanings  of  the  words,  God  said :  The  desert  Arabs  say :  We  have 
believed.  Say,  you  have  not  believed,  but  say  :  We  have  accepted 
Islam — 49:14.  This  shows  that  they  surrendered  outwardly.- 
Gebriel  once  asked  the  Prophet :  Whatis  Iman  and  what  is  Islam  ? 
The  Prophet  replied  in  two  different  meanings.  These  meaning's 
are  mixed  together.  Islam  is  the  work  of  mind,  words  and  actions, 
while  Iman  is  an  action  of  mind  or  to  confirm  truth  by  mind. 


120  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

(c)  the  third  meaning  relates  to  rules  of  Shariat  which 
governs  the  two  terms  :  One  relates  to  the  hereafter  and  another 
to  this  world.  The  former  is  to  bring  out  men  from  Hell  fire  and 
not  allow  them  to  remain  there  forever.  The  Prophet  said :  Whose 
has  in  his  heart  the  belief  to  the  weight  of  an  atom  will  be  brought 
out  of  Hellfire.  What  sort  of  Iman  is  this  ?  Some  say  it  is  inward 
belief  and  some  say  it  is  verbal  confession.  Some  say  it  is  actions 
according  to  Islam.  It  is  again  said  that  he  who  combines  in 
himself  all  these  three  elements  will  be  taken  out  of  Hell.  With 
regard  to  the  second  element,  a  man  will  also  be  taken  out  of  Hell 
although  he  committed  some  major  sins.  He  is  called  Fasiq  or  a 
great  sinner.  The  third  element  is  confirmation  of  faith  by  mind 
and  attestation  by  tongue  but  not  followed  by  action.  Regarding 
confirmation  of  truth  by  mind  at  death  before  verbal  confession 
by  tongue,  such  a  man  also  will  betaken  out  of  Hell  as  the  Prophet 
said:  He  who  has  an  atom  of  belief  in  his  heart  will  be  taken  out  of 
Hell.  Regarding  verbal  confession  by  tongue  of  Kaleima 
Shadadat  but  not  confirmation  by  mind,  there  is  no  doubt  that 
such  a  person  will  remain  forever  in  Hell. 

(2)  Second  question.  Iman  is  subject  to  increase  and 
decrease.  It  increases  by  good  deeds  and  decreases  by  evil  deeds. 
There  is  existence  ofa  thing  which  has  got  increase  or  decrease 
and  nothing  grows  or  diminishes  of  itself.  So  there  is  existence  of 
Iman  which  increases  by  good  deeds  and  decreases  by  evil  deeds. 
God  says  :  He  increased  their  belief  God  says  :  In  order  to 
increasse  their  belief  along  with  their  belief.  The  Prophet  said  : 
Belief  increases  and  decreases.  This  law  is  applicable  to  every 
attribute  of  mind.  Mind  appertains  to  the  unseen  spiritual  world 
and  the  actions  of  organs  appertain  to  this  world.  There  is  subtle 
tie  between  these  two  worlds  and  some  men  think  that  the  two 
worlds  are  the  same.  He  who  has  seen  both  the  worlds  perceived 
the  real  nature  of  things.  This  is  the  first  meaning.  Regarding  the 
second  meaning  of  increase  and  decrease  of  belief,  the  Prophet 
said  :  Belief  has  got  more  than  seventy  branches.  He  also  said  : 
When  a  fornicator  fornicates,  he  ceases  to  be  a  believer  at  the 
time.  So  there  is  action  along  with  belief  which  shows  that  it 
increases  and  decreases.  Regarding  its  third  meaning,  it  is  sure 
and  certain  belief  which  can  be  seen  by  Kashf,  expansion  of 
breast  and  deep  insight.  Mind  is  not  satisfied  till  it  has  got  faith 
like  the  fact  that  two  is  more  than  one,  that  fire  burns  and  that  the 
world  is  created.  So  this  is*the  highest  stage  of  belief  after  increase. 


Vol-I  FOUNDATION  OF  BELIEF  121 

(3)  Third  question  It  is  with  regard  to  the  answer  I  am  a 
believer  if  God  wills'  on  a  question  put  to  one — "Are  you  a 
believer"?  The  reply  should' not  be  "I  am  a  true  believer  or  I  am 
abeliever  to  God".  These  qualifications  are  correct  or  put  forward 
for  four  reasons,  two  of  them  come  from  doubt  and  two  donot 
come  from  doubt.  The  first  reason  which  does  not  come  form 
doubt  is  the  care  taken  for  fear  of  showing  oneself  pure.  God 
says:  Don't  inpute  purity  to  yourself.  God  says  :  Have  you  not 
seen  those  who  hold  themselves  to  be  righteous  4  :  52?  A  certain 
wise  man  was  asked  :  What  is  detestable  talk  ?  He  said  :  To  prasie 
oneself.  The  second  reason  for  the  use  of  these  qualifications  is 
courtesy  and  to  entrust  all  actions  to  the  will  of  God.  God  says,  by 
way  of  instruction  to  the  Prophet  (18  :  23):  Don' t  say  of  anything : 
T  will  do  it  tomorrow'  without  saying  if  God  wills.'  The  thjrd 
meaning  keeps  connection  with  doubt  when  one  says :  I  am  a  true 
believer  if  God  wills.  There  is  doubt  whether  the  man  is  a  perfect 
believer  because  God  said:  True  believers  are  those  only  who 
believe  in  God  and  His  Apostle  and  afterwards  do  not  doubt  and 
who  fight  with  their  lives  and  properties  for  the  cause  of  God. 
These  are  the  truthful — 94  :  15.  It  has  been  expressed  also  in 
verses— 2  :  172,  58:12,  57  :  10.  The  Prophet  said  :  Belief  has  got 
seventy  branches.  The  fourth  reason  arises  also  from  doubt.  It  is 
the  fear  of  bad  end,  for  no  one  knows  what  will  be  his  end,  good 
or  bad. 

These  are  therefore  the  different  reasons  for  qualifying 
answer  to  the  question :  Are  you  a  believer  ? 


— O— 


CHAPTER  III 

MYSTERIES  OF  CLEANLINESS 

i 

The  Holy  Prophet  said  :  Religion  is  founded  on  cleanliness. 
He  said :  Cleanliness  is  the  key  to  prayer.  God  said :  Therein  there 
are  men  who  love  purity  and  God  loves  the  pure — 9:109.  The 
Prophet  said  :  Cleanlines  is  one  half  of  belief.  God  said  :  God 
desires  to  make  you  clean  and  to  complete  His  favours  on 
you — 5:7. 

Those  who  possess  insight  understand  by  these  sayings  that 
the  most  important  thing  is  the  purification  of  the  heart.  If  the 
tradition  'cleanliness  is  one  half  of  faith  is  limited  only  to  the 
external  cleanliness  of  physical  organs  by  water  and  not  alsorto 
the  purification  of  the  heart  which  may  entertain  evil  designs  and 
•  thoughts,  its  meaning  then  will  be  distant  and  it  is  impossible. 

PURITY  HAS  GOT  FOUR  STAGES 

(1)  The  first  stage  is  the  purification  of  the  external  organs 
from  excrements  and  filths.  (2)  The  second  stage  is  the 
purification  of  the  bodily  organs  from  sins  and  faults  (3)  The 
third  stage  is  the  purification  of  the  heart  from  evil  traits  and  evil 
vices.  (4)  The  fourth  stage  is  the  purifications  of  the  innerself 
from  everything  except  God.  This  is  the  stage  of  the  Prophets  and 
the  saints.  Every  item  of  cleanliness  is  half  of  action,  because  the 
object  of  the  actions  is  the  glorification  and  greatness  of  God.  In 
realjty  God's  knowledge  is  not  attained  unless  the  heart  is 
purified  of  all  things  other  than  God.  For  this  reason,  God  said  : 
Say  'God'  then  leave  them  to  play  in  the  useless  falks — 6:91. 
There  can  be  no  two  things  in  mind  at  the  same  time  and  God  also 
has  not  created  two  minds  in  the  same  man.  The  object  of  the 
actions  is  to  adorn  the  mind  with  praiseworthy  qualities  and 
religous  firm  faith.  It  is  well  known  that  the  mind  will  not  be 
adorned  with  those  qualities  till  the  blameworthy  evils  and  false 
faith  reign  in  it. 

To  purify  the  mind  from  these  evils  comprises  half  of  its 
actions  and  the  first  half  is  pre-requisite  for  the  second.  In  this 
sense,  purity  is  said  to  be  half  of  belief.  So  to  purify  the  bodily 
limbs  from  the  prohibited  things  is  the  first  half  and  to  strengthen 
it  with  religous  acts  is  its  second  half.  These  are  the  stages  of 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  123 

i 

belief  and  every  stage  has  got  its  rank.  Nobody  will  attain  a 
higher  stage  unless  he  first  goes  through  the  lower  one.  He  can 
attain  real  purity  of  heart  till  he  purifies  it  from  the  blameworthy 
vices  and  adorn  it  with  the  praiseworthy  qualities.  He  can't 
purify  the  heart  till  he  purifies  his  organs  from  prohibited  things 
and  makes  it  firm  with  religous  acts.  The  more  honourable  is  the 
object,  the  more  difficult  is  the  attainment  of  that  object.  The 
longer  is  the  road  that  leads  to  it,  the  greater  are  the  obstacles. 
Don't  think  that  this  can  be  attained  with  ease  and  without 
efforts.  He  who  is  blind  to  these  stages  of  purity  will  not 
undersand  the  above  mentioned  four  stages.  He  will  understand 
the  lowest  stage  of  cleanliness.  It  is  like  the  outer  husk  of  a  crop  or 
like  skull  in  relation  to  brain.  He  understands  that  the  outer 
cleanliness  is  the  desired  object  and  makes  exaggeration  in  it  and 
spends  much  time  and  wealth  in  abstersion  (Istinja),  in 
cleanliness  of  cloth,  body  and  in  the  use  of  water  and  thinks  that 
the  noble  puity  comprises  these  outward  and  external 
cleanliness.  The  early  Muslims  concentrated  their  entire 
attention  and  energies  on  the  puification  of  their  hearts  and  were 
lenient  in  their  outward  cleanliness.  Even  Hazrat  Omar,  being 
placed  in  a  high  position,  made  abbution  with  the  water  from  a 
jar  which  belonged  to  a  Christain  woman.  The  companions  were 
accustomed  not  to  wash  their  hands  after  eating  from  the 
remains  of  fat  and  food  but  to  wipe  them  out  against  the  arches  of 
their  feet  and  regarded  the  use  of  soap  as  innovation.  They  used 
to  say  prayer  kneeling  and  prostrating  directly  on  the  ground  in 
the  mosque  and  walk  barefooted  on  the  roads.  They  used  to  use 
pebbles  after  calls  of  nature. 

Abu  Hurairah  and  some  immates  of  Suffa  said :  We  ate  meal 
and  when  the  prayer  time  came,  we  wiped  our  fingers  against 
thepebbles  and  proceeded  to  say  prayer.  Hazrat  Omar  said  :  We 
did  not  know  the  use  of  soap  at  the  time  of  the  Prophet  and  the 
hollows  of  our  feet  were,  our  towels.  It  is  said  that  the  first  four 
innovations  after  the  Prophet  were  the  use  of  sieves,  soap,  tables 
and  eating  to  satiety.  The  efforts  of  the  companions  were  towards 
the  purification  of  the  heart  to  the  extent  that  some  one  among 
them  said :  It  is  better  to  say  prayer  with  shoes  than  without  shoes 
because  when  the  Prophet  look  off  his  shoes  with  uncleanliness 
at  the  advent  of  Gabriel,  the  companions  also  took  off  their  shoes. 
He  told  them:  Way  have  you  taken  off  your  shoes?  One  of  them 
named  Nakhyi  said :  Perhaps  someone  in  need  may  pass  by  and 


124  MYSTERIES  OF  CLEANLINESS  Vol-I 

take  these  shoes.  In  fact,  they  walked  barefooted,  sat  on  the  mud 
and  sand,  prayed  directly  on  the  floors  of  the  mosque.  They  used 
to  eat  bread  of  coarse  wheat  which  the  animals  trod  with  their 
feet  and  sometimes  polluted  with  their  urine.  They  made  no 
efforts  to  avoid  small  impurities. 

These  things  have  now  changed.  The  people  termed 
cleanliness  for  ironed  cloth  and  say  that  it  is  the  foundation  of 
religion.  One  group  spend  most  of  their  times  in  beautifying 
their  bodies  just  like  a  new  bride  but  their  minds  are  full  of  evil 
thoughts,  pride,  self  conceit,  ignorance,  show  and  hypocrisy.  He 
who  cleanses  with-stones  after  calls  of  nature,  walks  barefooted 
in  mud,  prays  in  mosque  on  the  floor,  walks  on  the  rugs  without 
leather  over  shoes  or  makes  ablution  with  water  belonging  to  an 
old  woman,  is  attacked  furiosuly  and  he  is  termed  as  impure. 

The  following  are  three  matters  of  external  purity — (1) 
purification  from  impurities,  (2)  purification  of  the  body  from 
excrements  and  (3)  purification  from  bodily  growths,  such  as 
pairing  of  nails,  cutting  off  hairs,  circumcision,  removal  of  the 
hairs  of  pubes  and  the  like. 


SECTION  1 

PURIFICATION  FROM  IMPURITES 

There  are  three  matters  in  this,  the  things  to  be  removed,  the 
means  of  removal  and  the  meaning  of  removal.  That  which  shall 
have  to  be  removed  is  of  three  kinds  inanimate  objects,  animate 
objects  and  parts  of  animate  objects.  As  to  inanimate  objects,  all 
are  pure  except  wine  and  intoxicating  things.  As  to  animate 
objects,  all  except  dogs  and  pigs  and  their  young  ones  are  pure, 
when  an  animal  dies,  it  becomes  impure  except  five-locusts,  fish, 
worms  in  foodstuffs,  dead  animals  which  have  no  flowing  blood 
like  flies,  beetles  and  the  like.  Asto  purity  from  inanimate  objects, 
it  is  of  two  kinds,  the  first  is  what  is  cut  off  from  an  animal  and  its 
law  is  the  same  as  that  of  dead  bodies.  Hair  is  not  impure.  Bones, 
however,  become  impure  after  death.  The  second  is  what  is 
changed  after  entering  into  body.  They  are  all  impure.  What 
emits  from  the  body  not  after  change  is  pure,  such  as  sweat  and 
tear.  Things  which  have  a  fixed  seat  and  are  subject  to  change  are 
impure,  such  as  saliva,  mucus  of  nose  except  the  seedof  of  life  like 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  125 

semen,  eggs.  Blood,  pus,  feces,  urine  are  impure.  Nothing  is 
exempted  of  these  impruites  except  five  things  (1)  the  remains  of 
odour  after  abstertion  with  pebbles  are  exempted,  (2)  whatever 
cannot  be  avoided,  such  as  mud  in  the  streets  and  the  dust  of 
dung  inspite  of  their  impurity  is  exempted,  (3)  what  is  attached 
to  the  leather  socks  of  impurites  of  the  streets  is  exempted  after  it 
has  been  wiped  against  earth.  (4)  the  blood  of  fleas  and  the  like 
little  or  much  on  shirt  is  exempted  except  when  it  goes  beyond 
the  oridinary  limits.  (5)  and  the  blood  of  itches  and  pimples  is 
exempted. 

THE  MEANS  OF  REMOVAL  OF  IMPURITIES 

The  means  of  removal  of  impurities  are  either  condensed  or 
liquid  things.  The  condensed  or  solid  things  are  pebbles  of 
abstersion.  Pebble  purifies  it  if  it  is  itself  pure  and  dried.  It  should 
be  hard,  pure,  dry  and  free  from  illegality.  Liquid  thing  is  water 
with  which  impurities  are  cleansed.  Only  pure  water  can  remove 
impurities.  The  water,  when  mixed  with  impure  thing  and 
changing  not  its  colour  is  pure,  but  if  its  colour  taste  and  adour 
are  changed,  it  becomes  impure.  The  Prophet  said  :  When  water 
is  sufficient  to  fill  two  pitchers,  it  carries  no  impurities,  if  less,  it 
carries  impurities  and  does  not  remain  pure.  This  is  applicable  in 
case  of  stagnant  water.  If  flowing  water  mixes  with  impure 
things  and  does  not  remain  pure.  This  is  applicable  in  case  of 
stagnant  water.  If  flowing  water  mixes  with. impure  things  and 
becomes  changed,  it  becomes  them  impure. 

Some  incidents  together  with  urgent  need  and  necessity 
strengthen  the  belief  that  only  change  in  water  was.  taken  into 
consideration  by  the  Prophet.  The  following  words  of  the 
Prophet  support  it  :  Water  was  created  pure  and  nothing 
makes  it  impure  except  that  which  changes  its  colour,  taste 
and  smell. 

MANNER  TO  REMOVE  IMPURITIES:  If  the  impurity  is 
not  a  matter  of  touch,  it  is  sufficient  to  run  water  over  all  its  parts. 
If  the  impurity  is  physical,  it  should  be  removed.  If  its  taste 
remains,  it  indicates  the  pefsistence  of  the  physical  matter.  The 
same  is  true  of  the  persistence  of  colour.  If  it  sticks,  it  is  exempted 
provided  it  is  thoroughly  rubbed.  If  taste  persists,  the  persistence 
of  its  physical  matter  is  perceived. 


126  MYSTERIES  OF  CLEANLINESS  Vol-I 

SECTION  2 

PURIFICATION  OF  BODY  FROM  EXCREMENTS 

It  comprises  abstersion,  ablution,  bath  and  purifiaction  with 
sand.  We  are  now  stating  the  manner  of  their  performance  in  the 
prescribed  order.  The  following  are  the  rules  of  answering  the 
calls  of  nature.  If  one  is  pressed  by  calls  of  nature,  he  should  go 
from  the  view  of  men  and  take  shelter  behind  something.  He 
should  not  uncover  his  private  parts  before  he  sits  down  and 
should  not  face  or  keep  back  Ka'ba  sun  or  moon  but  there  is  no 
harm  when  he  is  within  a  room.  He  should  not  sit  in  a  meeting 
place  of  the  people,  urinate  in  stagnant  water,  under  a  fruit  tree, 
or  in  a  hard  surface  and  windy  place.  He  should  sit  on  his  left  leg. 
When  entering  a  room,  he  should  advance  his  left  leg  first  and 
then  his  right  leg  and  should  not  urinate  while  standing.  Hazrat 
Omar  said :  While  I  was  urinating  standing,  the  Prophet  told  me : 
O  Omar,  don't  pass  urine  standing.  Hazrat  Ibnul  Mobarak  said  : 
There  is  no  harm  in  urinating  in  abathroom  if  the  water  goes  out 
flowing.  The  Prophet  said  :  Let  nobody  among  you  urinate  in  a 
bathroom  and  then  make  ablution  as  many  machinations  come 
from  it.  None  should  take  with  him  anything  which  contains  the 
name  of  God  or  His  Apostle.  On  entering  room,  he  should  say :  I 
seek  refuge  to  God  from  the  accursed  devil,  the  filthy,  they 
impure,  the  abominable,  the  pernicious.  On  leaving  it,  he  should 
say :  All  prise  is  due  to  God  who  has  removed  from  me  what  was 
harmful  to  me  and  left  for  me  what  is  useful.  Before  sitting,  he 
should  take  pebbles  with  him.  He  should  not  wash  his  private 
part  with  water  in  the  first  place.  He  should  take  utmost  pains  in 
cleansing  his  penis  from  urine  by  shalking  it  to  and  for  three 
times.  Hazrat  Salman  said  :  The  Prophet  taught  us  everything 
even  how  to  cleanse  after  calls  of  nature.  He  prohibited  us  to  clear 
with  bone,  or  dung  or  face  the  Ka'ba. 

MANNER  OF  ABSTERSION 

He  will  perform  abstersion  wtih  three  stones.  If  the  orifice  is 
cleansed  there  with,  it  is  good  and  if  not  more  stones  may  be 
used.  The  Prophet  said  :  Let  one  who  uses  stones  use  odd 
numbers.  He  shall  take  stones  in  his  left  hand,  place  it  in  the  fore 
part  of  his  orifice  and  run  it  over  with  horizontal  and  circular 
motions  to  the  rear  part.  Thus  it  will  continue  from  the  rear  part 
to  the  fore  part.  Taking  the  third  stone,  he  should  run  it  around 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  127 

the  orifice.  He  should  then  move  to  another  place  and  perfrom 
the  act  of  abstersion  with  water.  At  the  end  of  abstersion,  he 
should  say  :  O  my  God,  purify  my  heart  from  hypocrisy  and 
make  my  private  part  pure  from  indecencies,  he  should  then 
wipe  his  hand  against  earth  or  wall  till  odour  is  removed 
therefrom.  The  use  of  stones  and  water  are  both  desirable.  It  is 
related  that  when  God  revealed  the  verse  (9  :  109) :  "Therein  are 
men  who  love  purity  and  God  loves  the  pure/  the  Apostle  of  God 
said  to  the  people  of  Quba :  What  is  the  purity  for  which  God  has 
praised  you  ?  They  said  :  We  are  accustomed  to  use  both  stones 
and  water  after  calls  of  nature. 

MANNER  OF  ABLUTION 

He  shall  commence  with  the  use  of  tooth  stick.  The  Prophet 
said  :  Your  mouths  are  the  pathways  of  the  Quran.  Cleanse  them 
therefore  with  stick.  The  Prophet  said  :  Prayer  after  the  use  of 
tooth  stick  is  better  than  prayer  without  its  use  by  seventy  five 
times.  He  said  :  Had  it  not  been  difficults  for  my  followers,  I 
would  have  ordered  them  to  use  tooth  stick  before  every  prayer. 
He  said  :  Why  should  I  not  see  you  with  yellow  teeth  ?  The 
Prophet  was  accustomed  to  use  tooth  stick  several  times  every 
night.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said  :  The  Prophet  has  so  repeatedly 
commanded  us  to  use  tooth  stick  that  we  thought  that  soon  a 
revelation  would  come  for  its  use.  The  Prophet  said  :  Use  tooth 
stick,  as  it  purifies  the  mouth  and  please  God.  Hazrat  Ali  said  : 
Use  of  tooth  stick  increases  memory  and  removes  phlegm.  The 
companion  of  the  Prophet  used  to  keep  tootch  stick  in  their  ears 
even  at  the  time  of  journey. 

It  is  desirable  to  use  the  tooth-stick  before  every  prayer  and 
every  ablution,  before  and  after  sleep,  after  eating  anything  of 
unpleasant  smell.  After  the  use  of  tooth-stick  face  the  Ka'ba  for 
ablution  and  then  say :  In  the  name  of  God,  the  Merciful,  the  most 
Compassionate.  The  Prophet  said  :  There  is  no  ablution  for  one 
who  does  not  take  the  name  of  God,  that  is  complete  ablution.  He 
should  then  wash  his  hands  three  times  and  should  say :  O  God,  I 
ask  Three  for  luck  and  blessing  and  seek  refuge  to  thee  against 
ill-luck  and  destruction.  He  shall  rinse  his  mouth  thrice  with 
water  and  say  afterwards :  O  God,  help  me  to  read  Thy  Book  and 
glorify  Thy  name.  Then  he  shall  take  up  water  and  cleanse  his 
nose  thrice  and  say  :  O  God.  grant  me  to  enjoy  the  fragrance  of 
pardise  while  Thou  art  pleased  to  promise  it  with  me.  At  the  time 


128  MYSTERIES  OF  CLEANLINESS    ,  Vol-I 

of  throwing  dust  from  nose,  he  should  say  :  I  seek  refuge  to 
These  from  the  stench  of  Hell  and  from  the  evil  of  the  world. 
He  will  then  wash  his  face  thrice  from  ear  to  hear  and  from  flat 
portion  of  head  to  the  fore  part  of  the  chin.  As  he  washes  his 
face,  he  should  say  :  O  God,  make  my  face  white  and  bright 
with  Thy  light  on  the  day  when  Thou  will  make  the  faces  of 
Thy  friends  bright.  He  should  then  wash  his  arms  upto  the 
elbows  three  times.  The  believers  will  come  on  the 
Resurrection  Day  with  brightness  on  their  foreheads,  writs 
and  ankles  from  the  effect  of  ablution.  The  Prophet  said  : 
Whose  is  able  to  cleanse  the  fore  part  of  his  head,  let  him  do  so. 
He  should  then  wipe  his  head  by  soaking  his  hands  in  water. 
Thrice  he  should  do  it  and  say  :  O  God,  cover  me  with  Thy 
mercy  and  shower  upon  me  Thy  blessings.  He  shall  then  wipe 
his  ears  both  outside  and  inside  with  fresh  water  thrice.  He 
should  then  wipe  his  neck  with  fresh  water  because  the 
Prophet  said  :  Wiping  the  neck  from  behind  will  save  one  from 
breach  of  trust  on  the  Resurrection  Day.  Then  he  should  wash 
his  right  foot  thrice  and  left  foot  thrice.  When  he  will  finish 
ablulion  thus,  he  should  raise  his  head  towards  the  sky  and  say 
:  I  testify  that  there  is  no  deity  but  God.  He  is  one  and  there  is 
no  patner  for  Him.  I  testify  also  that  Muhammad  is  the  servant 
and  Apostle  of  God. 

There  are  several  undesirable  things  in  ablution — to  wash 
each  limb  more  than  three  times.  The  Prophet  said  :  Whoever 
goes  beyond  three  times  transgresses.  He  said  :  soon  there  will 
appear  among  my  people  those  who  will  exaggerate  in  ablution 
and  invocation. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  ABLUTION:  The  Prophet  said  :  Whoever 
makes  ablution  well  and  prays  two  rak'ats  of  prayer  in  such  a 
way  that  nothing  of  the  world  occurs  in  his  mind,  goes  out  of  his 
sins  in  such  a  manner  that  he  comes  out  as  it  were  from  the  womb 
of  his  mother.  The  Prophet  said  :  Should  I  not  inform  you  what 
atones  sins  and  raises  ranks  ? — performing  ablution  in  distress, 
to  step  towards  the  mosques  aj»d  to  wait  for  the  next  prayer  after 
a  prayer.  This  the  "bond".  He  repeated  it  three  times.  The  Prophet 
said  after  washing  each  limb:  God  does  not  accept  prayer  except 
this  ablution.  He  performed  ablution  after  pouring  water  twice 
on  each  limb  and  said :  God  will  reward  him  twice.  He  performed 
ablution  of  each  limb  thrice  said  :  This  is  the  abluation  of  the 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  129 

Prophets  before  me  and  of  Abraham.  The  Prophet  said  :  Whose 
remembers  God  at  the  time  of  his  ablution,  God  purifies  his 
whole  body  and  he  who  does  not  remember  God,  is  not  purified 
except  those  places  where  the  water  was  applied.  The  Prophet 
said  :  Whose  makes  ablution  after  ablution,  ten  merits  are 
recorded  for  him.  The  Prophet  said  :  Ablution  after  ablution  is 
like  a  light.  The  Prophet  said  :  When  a  Muslim  in  ablution  rinses 
his  mouth,  the  sins  come  out  of  his  mouth.  When  he  blows  his 
nose,  the  sins  come  out  of  his  nose.  When  he  washes  his  face,  the 
sins  fall  down  from  his  face,  even  from  his  eye  brows.  When  he 
washes  his  two  hands,  the  sins  fall  down  from  his  two  hands, 
even  from  be  neath  his  finger-nails,  when  he  wipes  his  head,  the 
sins  comes  out  of  his  head,  even  from  his  two  ears.  When  he 
washes  his  feet,  the  sins  come  out  of  his  feet,  even  from  beneath 
his  toes.  Then  he  goes  to  the  mosque  and  prays.  Those  become 
additional.  There  is  in  another  tradition  :  One  who  makes 
ablution  is  like  a  fasting  man.  The  Prophet  said.  Whose  performs 
ablution  well  and  then  says  looking  to  the  sky :  I  testify  that  there 
is  no  deity  but  God  and  He  has  no  associate  and  I  testify  that 
Muhammad  is  the  Apostle  of  God,  eight  gates  of  Pardise  are 
opened  up  for  him  and  he  will  enter  therein  through  whichever 
gate  he  wishes. 

MANNER  OF  BATH 

One  shall  place  the  vessel  with  water  to  his  right  and  then 
after  taking  the  name  of  God  wash  his  hands  thrice  and  remove 
any  impurity  he  has  from  his  body.  He  shall  then  perform 
ablution  in  the  manner  already  described  with  the  exception  of 
washing  of  feet.  He  shall  then  pour  water  on  his  head  thrice,  over 
the  right  side  thrice,  over  his  left  side  thrice.  He  shall  then  rub  his 
body  infront  and  back  including  beard  and  hairs.  He  is  not 
required  to  make  ablution  after  bath  provided  he  has  performed 
it  before  bath. 

Bath  is  compulsory  in  four  cases,  in  case  of  emission  of 
semen,  in  case  of  copulation,  after  masturbation  and  after 
child  birth.  Other  baths  are  sunnat,  such  as  baths  on  two  I'd 
days,  Friday,  at  the  time  of  Ihram,  at  the  time  of  waiting  at 
Arafat,  at  the  time  of  entry  into  Mecca,  on  the  last  three  days  of 
pilgrimage,  at  the  farewell  circumbulation,  at  the  time  of 
conversion  to  Islam,  after  recovery  from  swoom  and  after 
washing  a  dead  body. 


130  MYSTERIES  OF  CLEANLINESS  Vol-I 

MANNER  OF  TAYAMMAM 

The  manner  of  purification  with  sand  is  as  follows.  If  the  use 
of  water  does  harm  to  a  person,  if  water  is  not  found  on  search,  or 
if  there  is  danger  in  reaching  the  place  of  water  such  as  fear  of 
ferocius  beast  or  fear  of  enemies,  or  if  the  water  is  even 
insufficient  to  quench  thrist,  or  if  the  water  is  in  possession  of 
another  and  the  price  is  high,  or  if  he  is  ill,  or  has  got  wound  and 
water  will  do  harm,  then  he  should  wait  till  the  time  of 
compulsory  prayer  comes.  He  should  then  proceed  to  use  pure 
soil  with  intention  of  Tayammam.  He  should  put  his  right  palm 
over  the  sandy  soil  and  lift  it  to  his  face,  wipe  it  and  intend  to 
observe  prayer.  It  should  be  done  only  once.  Then  he  shall  again 
place  his  left  plam  over  the  sand  and  wipe  his  right  hand  and 
then  place  his  right  hand  to  the  elbows  over  the  sand  and  then 
wipe  his  left  hand  up  to  the  elbows.  By  this  Tayammam,  only  one 
prayer  at  a  time  can  be  done. 

SECTION  3 

CLEANSING  THE  EXTERNAL  BODILY  GROWTHS 
AND  DISCHARGES 

These  are  of  two  kinds,  the  discharges  and  the  wet  excretions 
of  the  body  and  bodily  growths.  These  excretions  are  eight  in 
number. 

(1)  That  which  attaches  to  the  hairs  of  head  such  as  dirt  and 
lice  should  be  removed  by  washing,  combing  and  the  use  of 
ointment.  The  Prophet  used  to  oil  his  hairs  and  comb  them  on 
every  alternate  days  and  ordered  his  followers  to  do  the  same. 
The  Prophet  said :  Oil  your  hairs  on  every  alternate  days.  He  also 
said  :  Let  one  honour  his  hairs.  It  means :  Keep  them  clean  of  filth 
and  arrange  them.  Once  a  man  came  to  the  Prophet  with 
dishevelled  hairs  and  fuffled  beard  and  he  said :  Has  he  got  no  oil 
wherewith  to  arrange  his  hairs  ?  Then  he  said :  One  of  you  comes 
as  if  he  is  a  devil.  (2)  Filth  which  collects  in  the  holes  of  ears.  This 
filth  should  carefully  be  caleansed.  (3)  Filth  in  the  nose  should  be 
removed  by  inhaling  and  exhaling.  (4)  The  filth  which  collects 
between  the  teeth  and  the  tip  of  the  tongne  should  be  removed  by 
tooth  stick  and  the  rinsing  of  mouth.  (5)  Filth  which  attaches  to 
the  beard  should  be  removed  and  the  beard  should  be  combed. 
There  is  a  well  known  tradition  that  the  Prophet  either  at  home  or 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  131 

in  journey  never  parted  with  his  tooth  stick,  comb  and  mirror. 
Hazrat  Ayesha  said  that  the  Prophet  said:  God  loves  a  man  who 
adorns  himself  whenever  he  goes  out  to  meet  with  his  brethren. 
(6)  The  filth  which  collects  in  finger  joints  should  be  removed  and 
the  Prophet  ordered  his  followers  to  cleanse  them  specially  after 
eating.  (7)  The  filth  which  collects  in  nails  of  fingers  should  be 
removed.  The  Prophet  ordered  that  the  manicuring  of  nails, 
plucking  the  hairs  of  armpits  and  shaving  the  pubes  should  be 
done  once  every  forty  days.  Once  revelation  stopped  coming  to 
the  Prophet.  When  Gebrail  came  to  him,  he  asked  him  the  reason 
and  Gebrail  said  :  How  can  revelation  come  to  you  when  you 
have  not  cleansed  the  filth  from  your  knuckls  and  nails  and  filth 
of  mouth  by  toothstick?  (8)  Filth  of  the  whole  body  collected 
through  perspiration  and  dust  of  path  ways  should  be  removed 
by  bath.  There  is  no  harm  to  enter  public  bath  room  for  that. 

SECOND  KIND  OF  FILTHS  - 

These  are  bodily  growths  and  are  of  eight  kinds.  (1)  Haixs  of 
head.  There  is  no  harm  in  shaving  the  hairs  of  head  for  one  who 
desires  to  be  clean  and  there  is  no  harm  in  keeping  them 
provided  he  oils  them  and  keeps  arranged  and  combed.  (2)  Hairs 
of  moustache.  The  Prophet  said  :  Cut  off  your  moustaches,  in 
another  naration,  spare  your  moustaches.  In  another  naration, 
trim  your  moustaches  and  spare  your  beards.  In  other  words,  let 
your  moustaches  extend  to  the  upper  lip.  Shaving  of  moustaches 
was  never  mentioned  in  the  tradition,  while  trimming  so  closely 
as  to  resemble  shaving  has  been  narrated  by  the  companions. 
There  is  no  harm  in  leaving  the  ends  of  moustaches  to  hang 
down.  The  Prophet  said  :  Cut  off  your  moustache  along  a  tooth 
stick.  The  Prophet  said  :  Spear  the  beard  and  let  it  grow.  The 
Prophet  said  :  Do  the  opposite  as  the  Jews  used  to  spare  their 
moustaches  and  trim  their  beards. 

(3)  Hairs  of  armpits  should  be  removed  once  every  forty 
days  either  by  plucking  or  by  shaving  (4)  Hairs  of  pubes  should 
be  removed  once  every  forty  days  either  by  shaving  or  by  the  use 
of  a  depilatory.  (5)  Nails  should  he  manicured  because  of  their 
ugly  appearances  and  also  because  of  the  dirt  which  collects 
underneath  them.  The  Prophet  said  :  O  Abu  Hurairah,  manicure 
your  nails  as  the  devil  sits  therein  when  they  are  long.  (6 — 7) 
Navel  cord  and  foreskin  of  genital  organ.  The  naval  cord  is  cut 
off  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  child.  The  Prophet  said :  Circumcision 


132  MYSTERIES  OF  CLEANLINESS  Vol-I 

is  sunnat  for  a  male  and  meritorious  for  a  female.  Excess  should 
be  avoided  in  the  case  of  a  female.  The  Prophet  said  to  Omme 
Atiyyah  :  O  Omme  Atiyyah,  be  moderae  in  circumcision  and  cut 
off  only  a  small  portion  of  clitoris,  for  it  is  better  to  preserve 
feminity  and  more  welcome  to  masculinity.  (8)  Length  of  beard. 
There  are  differences  of  opinion  regarding  the  length  of  the 
beard.  Some  say  that  it  is  to  be  kept  up  to  the  grip  and  there  is  no 
harm  in  cutting  beyond  the  grip.  Hazrat  Omar  and  some 
Tabeyins  used  to  do  it.  Hasan  Basari  and  Qatadah  said  that  to 
spare  it  to  grow  long  is  better  as  the  Prophet  said  :  Spare  your 
beards.  It  has  been  said  that  the  bigger  the  beard,  the  smaller  the 
intellect. 

There  are  ten  undesirable  practices  regarding  beard.  These 
are  dyeing  the  beard  black,  bleaching  it  with  sulpher,  plucking  it, 
plucking  the  grey  hairs,  trimming  it,  augmenting  its  size, 
keeping  it  dishevelled,  combing  it  for  show  of  people,  making  it 
black  for  show  of  youth,  making  it  grey  to  attract  honour  and 
dyeing  it  red  or  yellow.  Dyeing  it  with  black  colour  is  prohibited 
as  the  Prophet  said :  The  best  or  your  youths  is  he  who  follows  the 
old  among  you  and  the  worst  of  your  old  is  he  who  follows  the 
youth  among  you.  The  Prophet  said  :  Black  dye  is  the  sign  of  the 
inmates  of  Hell.  The  first  man  who  used  black  dye  was  Pharaoh. 
The  Prophet  said  :  There  will  appear  in  latter  ages  people  who 
will  dye  their  beards  black  like  the  peak  of  pigeons.  They  will  not 
get  the  fragranc  eof  Paradise.  Dyeing  the  beard  yellow  or  red  is 
permitted.  The  Prophet  said :  Yellow  is  the  colour  with  which  the 
Muslims  dye  their  beards  and  red  is  the  colour  with  which  the 
believers  dye  their  beards.  Henna  can  be  used  for  red  dye  and 
saffron  and  phillyrea  for  yellow  dye.  Bleaching  the  beard  with 
sulpher  to  give  the  appearance  of  advanced  age  to  attract 
venration  and  to  have  their  testimony  accepted  is  undesirable.  To 
shave  beard  is  Makruh  or  undesirable.  So  also  plucking  grey  hair 
because  the  Prophet  prohitited  it  as  it  is  a  light  for  a  believer. 


CHAPTER  IV 

PRAYER 

Prayer  is  the  pillar  of  religion  and  safeguard  and  root  of 
religious  belief  the  chief  of  religious  actions.  The  chapter  is 
divided  into  seven  sections. 

SECTION  1 

EXCELLENCE  OF  PRAYER 

EXCELLENCE  OF  AZAN:  The  Prophet  said  :  Three 
persons  will  remain  on  the  Resurection  Day  on  the  mountain 
of  black  musk.  They  will  have  no  fear  of  account  and  they 
will  have  no  anxiety  till  they  become  free  from  what  is  near 
men.  (1)  One  who  recites  the  Quran  to  seek  the  pleasure  of 
God  and  leads  the  prayer  of  the  people  who  remain  pleased 
with  him.  (2)  One  who  proclaims  A^zan  in  a  mosque  for 
pleasure  of  God  and  call  the  people  towards  the  path  of 
God.  (3)  One  who  is  given  trouble  in  the  world  regarding 
his  livelihood  but  does  not  give  up  the  actions  of  the  next 
world  in  searching  it.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  a  man,  jinn  or 
anything  hears  the  Azan  of  a  Muazzen,  he  will  testify  for 
him  on  the  Resurrection  day.  The  Prophet  said  :  The  hand 
of  the  Merciful  remains  on  the  head  of  a  Muazzen  till  he 
finishes  his  Azan.  God  says  :  If  a  man  calls  towards  God 
and  does  good,  who  is  better  than  him  in  preaching  ?  This 
was  'revealed  regarding  a  Muazzen.  The  Prophet  said  : 
When  you  hear  Azan,  say  what  Muazzen  says.  Say  at  the 
time  of  Haia-alas-salat  "There  is  no  might;  and  strength 
except  through  God."  When  he  says  :  prayer  has  begun, 
say  'May  God  establish  the  prayer  and  keep  its  tongue  so 
long  as  the  heaven  and  earth  exist.  When  at  the  time  of 
Fajr  prayer  it  is  recited  'prayer  is  better  then  sleep',  say 
'you  have  spoken  the  truth,  you  have  spoken  good  and 
given  admonition/  Say  when  the  Azan  is  finished  :  O 
God,  Lord  of  this  perfect  invitation  and  ever  living 
prayer,  grant  position,  means  and  honour  to  Muhammad 
and  raise  him  up  to  the  of  glory  which  Thou  hast  promised 
him." 


134  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

EXCELLENCE  OF  COMPUSLORY  PRAYER 

God  says:  Prayer  is  compulsory  on  the  believers  at  the 
appointed  times.  The  Prophet  said  :  God  has  made  compulsory 
for  His  servants  prayer  for  five  times.  If  a  man  observes  them  and 
does  not  leave  anything  out  of  their  duties,  there  is  covenant  for 
him  from  God  that  He  will  admit  him  in  paradise.  If  a  man  does 
not  observe  them,  there  is  no  covenant  from  God  for  him.  If  He 
wishes.  He  may  punish  him  and  if  He  wishes,  He  may  admit  him 
in  paradise.  The  Prophet  said  :  Prayer  five  times  is  like  a  flowing 
canal  of  pure  water  by  the  side  of  one's  houes.  He  takes  bath  five 
times  daily  in  it.  Will  you  see  any  impurity  in  his  body  ?  They 
said  :  No.  The  Prophet  said  :  As  water  removes  impurities,  so 
prayer  for  five  times  removes  sins.  The  Prophet  said:  Prayer  for 
five  times  expiates  the  sins  of  a  man  till  he  does  not  commit  major 
sins.  The  Prophet  said  :  The  distinction  between  us  and  the 
hypocrites  is  our  presence  at  morning  and  night  prayers  and 
their  absence  at  these  two  prayers.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  a  man 
meets  God  after  destroying  his  prayer.  God  will  not  look  towards 
his  virtues.  The  Prophet  said  :  Prayer  is  the  pillar  of  religion.  He 
,Jwho  gives  it  up  destroys  the  pillar.  The  Prophet  was  once  asked  : 
Which  action  is  best  ?  He  said  :  To  pray  at  the  appointed  times. 
The  Prophet  said :  If  a  man  protects  his  prayer  for  five  times  with 
full  ablution  and  at  appointed  times,  these  will  be  proof  and  light 
for  him  on  the  Resurrection  Day.  He  who  destroys  his  prayer  will 
rise  with  Pharaoh  and  Haman. 

The  Prophet  said:  Prayer  is  a  key  to  paradise.  He  said  :  God 
has  not  made  anything  compulsory  dear  to  Him  for  this  servants 
after  Tauhid  than  prayer.  Had  there  been  anything  better  than  it, 
he  would  have  fixed  it  for  the  angels.  They  took  from  Him  the 
organs  of  prayer.  Some  make  bow,  some  prostrate,  some  stand, 
some  sit.  The  Prophet  said :  He  who  gives  up  prayer  intentionally 
becomes  an  infidel.  In  other  words,  he  becomes  near  coming  out 
of  faith  as  his  firm  tie  becomes  loose  and  his  pillar  falls  down  just 
as  when  a  man  comes  near  a  town  it  is  said  that  he  has  reached  the 
town  and  entered  it.  The  Prophet  said  :  He  who  give  up  prayer 
intentionally,  becomes  free  from  the  convenant  of  Muhammad. 
The  Prophet  said  :  O  Abu  Hurairah,  enjoin  on  the  members  of 
your  family  to  pray  as  you  can't  conceive  wherefrom  God  will 
supply  you  provision. 


Vol-I  PRAYER  135 

EXCELLENCE  OF  FULFILLING  THE  DUTIES  OF  PRAYER: 

The  Prophet  said:  Compulsory  prayer  is  like  a  scale.  He  who 
measures  out  in  full  takes  full.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  two  men  of 
my  followers  stand  in  prayer,  it  seems  that  their  prostrations  are 
the  same  but  the  spirit  of  their  prayer  is  like  the  distance  of  the 
heaven  and  earth.  He  hinted  at  their  God-fear.  The  Prophet  said : 
God  will  not  look  to  a  man  on  the  Resurection  Day  who  does  not 
make  his  backbone  erect  between  his  bow  and  prostration.  The 
Prophet  said :  If  a  man  turns  his  face  towards  another  direction  in 
prayer,  God  will  turn  his  face  in  to  that  of  an  ass.  The  Prophet 
said  :  If  a  man  says  prayer  at  its  appointed  time,  establishes 
ablution,  makes  his  bow  and  prostration  perfect  and  has  got  God 
fear,  it  will  become  bright  and  rise  upwards  and  say  :  May  God 
guard  you  as  you  have  guarded  me.  If  a  man  does  not  pray  at  its 
appointed  time,  does  not  make  ablution  well  and  does  not  make 
perfect  his  ruku  and  prostration  and  God  fear,  it  will  become 
dark  and  rise  upwards  and  say  :  May  God  destroy  you  as  you 
have  destroyed  me.  God  will  keep  it  folded  as  old  cloth  is  kept 
folded.  The  Prophet  said  :  The  word  thief  applies  to  one  who 
steals  in  prayer. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  PRAYING 
IN  CONGERGATION 

The  Prophet  said :  The  rewards  of  a  prayer  in  congregation  is 
twenty  seven  times  more  than  the  prayer  said  alone.  The  Prophet 
did  not  see  once  some  persons  joining  prayer  in  congregation 
and  said  :  I  wished  that  I  should  give  order  to  some  one  to  lead 
the  prayer  and  oppose  those  who  have  not  joined  in  prayer  and 
burn  their  houses.  In  another  narration  :  I  oppose  those  persons 
who  do  not  pray  in  congregation  and  order  that  their  houses 
should  be  burnt  with  fuel.  If  a  man  among  them  had  known  what 
rewards  there  are  in  night  prayer,  he  would  have  surely  been 
present  at  night  prayer.  There  is  in  Hadis  :  He  who  remains  at 
night  prayer.  There  is  in  Hadis  :  He  who  remains  at  night  prayer 
prayed  as  it  were  half  the  night.  He  who  remains  present  in  the 
morning  prayer  prayed  as  it  were  the  whole  night.  The  Prophet 
said  :  He  who  prays  a  prayer  in  congregation  fills  up  his  neck 
with  divine  service.  Hazrat  Sayeed-b-Musayyeb  said  :  I  reached 
the  mosque  before  Azan  for  20  years  consequitively.  The  sage 
Waseh  said  :  I  want  three  things  in  the  world  (1)  such  a  brother 
who  will  keep  me  straight  if  I  become  crooked,  (2)  such 


136  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

livelihood  as  can  be  earned  without  begging  and  (3)  such  a 
prayer  in  congregation  of  which  the  faults  are  forgiven  to  me  and 
excellence  is  written  for  me.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said :  He  who  does 
not  respond  to  Azan  does  not  hope  for  good  and  no  good  is 
expected  from  him.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  a  man  prays  in 
congregation  for  forty  days  and  does  and  lose  even  Takbir,  God 
writes  for  him  two  salvations — (1)  one  salvation  from  hypocrisy 
and  another  from  Hell. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  PROSTRATION:  The  Prophet  said  : 
There  is  nothing  except  secret  prostration  which  can  take  one 
near  God.  The  Prophet  said :  There  is  no  such  Muslim  whom  God 
does  not  give  a  rank  in  lieu  of  his  one  prostration  and  remove  one 
sin  from  him.  A  man  asked  the  Prophet  :  Pray  that  I  may  be 
included  within  the  party  of  your  intercession  so  that  He  may 
give  me  mercy  of  your  intercession  in  paradise.  The  Prophet  said 
:  One  who  prostrates  will  gain  the  nearness  of  God,  as  God  says : 
Prostrate  and  seek  nearness.  God  says  :  There  are  signs  in  their 
foreheads  as  an  effect  of  prostration.  It  is  said  that  this  sign  is 
effected  as  a  result  of  dust  that  is  attached  to  forehead  at  the  time 
prostration.  Some  say  that  it  is  the  light  of  God-fear  as  it  is 
expressed  outwardly  from  a  secret  place.  This  is  the  correct  view. 
Some  say  that  it  is  the  light  that  will  be  seen  on  their  forehead  on 
the  Resurrection  Day  on  account  of  ablution.  The  Prophet  said  : 
When  a  man  prostrates,  the  devil  goes  away  from  him  weeping 
and  saying  :  Also  !  he  has  been  ordered  to  prostrate  and  he  has 
prostrated.  So  there  is  Paradise  for  him.  I  have  been  ordered  to 
prostrate  but  as  I  have  disobeyed  it,  there  is  Hell  for  me.  It  is 
narrated  that  the  Caliph  Abdul  Aziz  used  not  to  make 
prostration  except  on  the  ground.  Hazrat  Abu  Hurairah  said  : 
Prostration  takes  a  servant  near  God  and  he  makes  invocation  at 
that  time. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  GOD  FEAR:  God  says :  Pray  to  remember 
Me.  God  says  :  Don't  be  one  of  the  heedless.  God  says  :  Don't 
come  near  prayer  when  you  are  intoxicated  till  you  donot 
understand  what  you  say.  Some  say  that  intoxication  means  a 
great  anxiety.  Some  say  that  it  means  attachment  to  the  world. 
There  are  many  worshippers  who  do  not  drink  wine  but  they 
.don't  know  what  they  say  in  prayer.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  a  man 
prays  two  rakats  without  any  thought  of  the  world  therein,  his 
past  sins  are  forgiven.  The  Prophet  said  :  Prayer  is  the 


Vol-I  PRAYER  137 

embodiment  of  modesty,  humility,  entreaties,  repentance, 
raising  of  hands  and  utterance  of  words  "O  God,  O  God"  He  who 
does  not  do  it,  is  a  cheat.  There  is  in  earlier  scriptures  that  God 
said :  I  don't  accept  the  prayer  of  every  one.  I  accept  the  prayer  of 
one  who  humbles  himself  before  My  glory,  does  not  take  boast  in 
doing  My  service  and  gives  food  for  My  sake  to  the  hungry  and 
the  poor.  I  have  made  prayer  compulsory,  ordered  for  Haj  and 
Tawaf  for  My  remembrance.  If  you  have  got  no  fear  of  God  in 
your  mind,  what  is  the  value  of  your  Zikr  ?  The  Prophet  said  : 
When  you  pray,  pray  in  such  a  manner  that  you  are  bidding 
farewell.  He  said  :  Fear  God,  He  will  teach  you.  God  says  :  Fear 
God  and  know  that  you  must  meet  Him.  The  Prophet  said  :  He 
who  does  not  restrain  himself  from  indecency  and  evil  deeds  in 
prayer  keeps  away  God.  Prayer  is  monazat  or  invocation.  How 
can  it  be  with  heedlessness  ?  Hazrat  Ayesha  said  :  The  Prophet 
used  to  talk  with  us  and  we  also  used  to  talk  with  him.  When  the 
time  for  prayer  came,  he  did  not  as  it  were  recognise  us  and  we 
also  did  not  recognise  him,  as  we  remained  busy  in  declaring  the 
glory  of  God.  The  Prophet  said  :  God  does  not  respond  prayer  of  a 
man  who  does  not  observe  it  with  his  mind  and  body.  When  the 
Prophet  Abraham  stood  in  prayer,  the  voice  of  his  mind  could 
have  been  heard  from  a  distance  of  two  miles.  When  the  sage 
Sayeed  Tanukhi  prayed,  his  two  eyes  used  to  shed  tears  which 
flowed  down,  his  beard.  The  Prophet  once  saw  a  man  in  prayers 
sporting  with  his  beard  and  said  :  If  he  and  his  mind  had  God 
fear,  his  organs  also  would  have  God-fear.  It  is  narrated  of 
Moslem-b-Yasar  that  whenever  he  wished  to  pray,  he  used  to  say 
to  his  family  members  :  You  hold  conversation,  I  will  not  hear 
you.  It  is  said  that  when  he  was  praying  in  the  congregational 
mosque,one  corner  of  the  mosque  once  suddenly  fell  down  for 
which  the  people  gathered  there,  but  he  could  not  know  it  till  he 
finished  his  prayer.  When  the  time  of  prayer  came,  the  heart  of 
Hazrat  AH  used  to  tremble  and  his  colour  became  changed.  He 
was  questioned  :  O  Commander  of  the  faithful,  what  has 
happened  to  you  ?  He  said  :  It  is  time  of  trust  of  God  which  was 
entrusted  to  the  heavens,  earth  and  mountains  but  they  became 
fearful  of  it  and  refused  to  bear  it,  but  I  am  bearing  it  when  it  has 
come  to  me.  When  Hazrat  Jainal  Abedin,  son  of  Hazrat  Hussain, 
performed  ablution,  his  colour  turned  place.  His  family  members 
asked  him.  What  troubles  you  at  the  time  of  ablution?  He  said  : 
Don't  you  see  before  whom  I  am  going  to  stand  ?  Hazrat  Daud 
used  to  say  in  his  Monazat :  O  my  Lord,  who  lives  in  your  house 


138  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

and  from  whom  you  accept  prayer  ?  God  revealed  to  him  :  The 
man  who  lives  in  My  house  and  from  whom  I  accept  prayer  is  one 
who  humbles  himself  before  My  glory,  passes  his  life  in  My 
remembrance,  controls  his  passion  for  My  sake,  entertains  a 
stranger  and  shows  kindness  to  the  aggrieved.  His  light  will 
sparkle  like  the  rays  of  the  sun  in  the  sky.  I  respond  to  him  if  he 
calls  me.  If  he  invoke  Me.  I  accept  it.  I  give  him  patience  in  his 
ignorance,  remembrance  in  his  carelessness  and  light  in  his 
pride.  His  simile  among  the  people  is  the  smile  of  Ferdous  in  high 
gardens.  His  river  does  not  become  dry  and  his  face  does  not 
become  changed. 

Once  Hatem  Asem  was  asked  about  prayer  and  he  said  : 
When  the  time  of  prayer  comes,  I  make  full  ablution,  come  to  the 
praying  place  and  wait  there  till  my  neighbours  come  there.  Then 
I  stand  for  prayer,  face  the  Ka'ba  with  Bridge  under  my  feet, 
Paradise  by  me  right  side  and  Hell  by  my  left  side,  angel  of  death 
behind  me  and  think  that  this  is  my  last  prayer.  Then  I  stand 
between  fear  and  hope,  recite  Takbir,  make  Ruk'u  with  humility, 
prostrate  with  fear  and  sit  on  my  left  waist  and  spead  my  sole  of 
feet  and  keep  my  right  side  on  my  toes.  I  don't  know  whether  my 
prayer  has  been  accepted  or  not. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  MOSQUE  AND 
PRAYING  PLACE 

God  says:  Those  who  have  got  faith  in  God  and  the  next 
world  inhabit  God's  mosques.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  a  man 
constructs  a  mosque  for  God,  He  constructs  for  him  a  place  in 
Paradise.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  a  man  loves  mosque,  God  loves 
him.  He  said :  When  one  of  you  enters  a  mosque,  let  him  pray  two 
rak'ats  before  he  sits.  He  said  :  There  is  no  prayer  for  mosque 
except  in  mosque.  He  said  :  Angels  like  one  of  you  until  he  keeps 
seated  in  his  praying  place.  They  say  :  O  God,  send  blessings  on 
him.  O  God,  have  mercy  on  him,  forgive  him  till  he  keeps  his 
ablution  or  gets  out  of  mosque.  The  Prophet  said  :  There  will  be 
some  people  among  my  followers  who  will  come  to  mosque  and 
sit  in  groups.  They  will  like  to  talk  of  this  world  and  its  matters. 
Don't  sit  with  them.  God  has  got  no  necessity  of  them.  He  said  : 
God  said  in  some  of  His  books  :  Mosques  are  my  houses  in  the 
world  and  My  neighbours  are  those  people  in  them  who  are 
habituated  to  go  there.  Good  news  is  for  one  who  keeps  his  house 
pure  and  then  meets  Me  in  My  house.  He  said  :  When  you  find  a 


Vol-I  PRAYER  139 

man  visiting  mosque  always,  bear  witness  that  he  has  got  faith. 
He  said  :  Random  talks  in  mosque  consumes  virtues  as  animals 
eat  grass.  Hazrat  Anas  said  :  If  a  man  gives  a  light  in  a  mosque, 
angels  and  the  bearers  of  the  Thone  seek  forgiveness  for  him  till 
the  light  exists  in  the  mosque.  Hazrat  Ali  said :  When  a  man  dies, 
praying  cloth  in  the  world  and  his  good  deeds  raised  high  in  the 
sky  weep  for  him.  Then  he  said  :  The  heaven  and  earth  did  not 
weep  for  them  and  wait  for  them.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said  :  The 
word  weeps  for  him  for  forty  days. 

SECTION  2 

OPEN  ACTIONS  IN  PRAYER 

After  the  removal  of  the  impurities  of  body,  place,  cloth  and 
places  of  shame,  make  ablution  facing  the  Ka'ba  and  keep  some 
open  space  between  the  two  feet.  Keep  your  head  erect  or  bend  a 
little  and  close  the  eyes,  if  you  cast. your  look,  cast  it  to  your  place 
of  prostration.  Then  make  niyyat,  then  raise  both  the  hands  up  to 
the  ears  uttering  Allhaho  Akbar  —  God  is  greatest.  There  after 
recite  the  formula :  Glory  to  Thee,  O  God,  there  is  Thy  priase  and 
blessed  is  Thy  name,  exalted  is  Thy  Majesty  and  there  is  no  deity 
besides  Thee.  I  seek  refuge  to  God  from  the  accursed  devil  and  I 
begin  in  the  name  of  God,  the  most  Compassionate  the  most 
Merciful.  Then  recite  the  opening  chapter  of  the  Quran  and  then 
at  least  three  verses  of  the  Quran.  Then  saying  God  is  greatest/ 
bow  down  and  recite  three  times  'Glory  to  my  Lord  the  Great' 
and  then  fall  in  prostration  on  the  ground  and  recite  three  times 
'Glory  to  my  Lord,  the  Great,  Then  sit  down  and  then  again  fall 
prostrate  and  recite  the  formula  as  above  mentioned  and  then 
stand  erect.  Thus  finish  one  unit  of  prayer.  Then  praying  another 
unit  in  this  manner,  sit  and  recite:  All  invocations  are  for  God  and 
all  services  and  pure  things.  Peace  be  on  thee  O  Prophet,  and  the 
mercy  of  God  and  His  blessing.  Peace  be  on  us  and  on  the 
righteous  servan  ts  of  God.  I  bear  witness  that  there  is  no  deity  but 
God  that  Muhammad  is  His  servant  and  His  Messenger.  Then  if 
you  do  not  pray  four  such  units  make  the  following  invocation  : 
O  God,  make  Muhammad  and  the  followers  of  Muhammad 
successful  as  Thou  didst  make  successful  Abraham  and  his 
followers,  for  surely  Thou  art  the  praised,  mighty.  O  God,  bless 
Muhammad  and  the  followers  of  Muhammad  as  Thou  did  bless 
Abraham  and  the  followers  of  Abraham.  Surely  Thou  at  the 


140  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

praised,  the  mighty.  They  close  up  the  service  followed  by  an 
innovation  of  your  choice. 

SECTION  3 

INTERNAL  CONDITIONS 

Prayer  should  be  observed  with  humility  of  mind.  God  says : 
'Pray  to  remember  Me.'  Presence  of  mind  is  opposed  to  absence 
of  mind  or  heedlessness.  If  one  is  heedless  throughout  his  prayer, 
how  can  he  say  prayer  with  the  purpose  of  remembering  God  ? 
God  says  :  Don't  be  of  the  heedless.  He  says  :  'Prayer  is  modesty 
and  humility.'  Therein  there  is  injunctions,  prohibitions  and 
blocks.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  a  man  does  not  refrain  from  thought 
of  absence  and  evil  things,  it  does  not  add  to  it  but  distance,' 
There  are  two  kinds  of  prayer  of  a  heedless  man.  The  Prophet 
said  :  There  are  many  praying  men  who  do  not  gain  anything  in 
their  prayer  except  fatigue  and  effort§.  The  prayer  of  a  heedless 
man  has  been  spoken  there.  The  Prophet  said  :  Nothing  is  written 
for  a  praying  man  except  what  he  understands  in  his  prayer.  Its 
speciality  is  that  there  are  entreaties  and  seekings  to  God  in 
prayer.  Monazat  with  inattention  is  not  considered  as  Monazat. 
There  are  God's  remembrance  in  prayer,  Quran  reading,  bow, 
prostration,  standing  and  sitting.  God's  remembrance  means 
prayer  and  Monazat  to  Him.  Without  them,  it  ends  in  voice  and 
tongue. 

The  object  of  fasting  is  to  bring  under  control  belly  and  sexual 
passion,  or  else  it  ends  in  depriving  this  body  from  food  and 
drink.  Body  is  tried  by  the  troubles  of  pilgrimage.  Troubles  are 
given  to  mind  if  Zakat  is  paid  out  of  wealth  and  thus  mind  is 
tried.  There  is  no  don't  that  the  object  of  these  religious  acts  is  to 
remember  God.  If  that  object  is  not  attained,  there  is  no  use  in 
prayer,  as  it  is  very  easy  to  move  the  tongue  with  inattention.  The 
object  of  word  is  to  talk  and  it  does  not  occur  except  in  mind.  It 
does  not  exist  in  mind  without  humility  of  spirit  and  presence  of 
mind.  If  you  recite  in  prayer  :  Show  us  the  right  path,  and  if  you 
are  inattentive  at  that  time,  it  is  only  the  movement  of  your 
tongue  and  nothing  else.  The  object  of  Quran  reading  and  God's 
remembrance  is  to  praise  and  glorify  God  and  to  entreat  Him  and 
invoke  Him  with  humility  of  spirit,  but  if  his  mind  remains 
absent  at  that  time  and  does  not  know  that  He  is  present  with 
whom  he  is  speaking,  it  must  be  understood  that  his  tongue 


Vol-I  PRAYER  141 

moves  only  owing  to  habit  but  he  is  far  away  from  the  object  of 
prayer  to  enliven  God's  remembrance  and  with  that  to  make  firm 
the  tie  of  faith. 

Sifiyan  Saori  said  :  The  prayer  of  one  who  has  got  no 
God-fear  becomes  void.  Hasan  Basari  said  :  The  prayer  which  is 
not  said  with  attention  hastens  towards  punishment.  The 
Prophet  said  :  There  are  many  praying  men  whose  prayers  are 
written  to  the  extent  of  one  sixth  or  one  tenth.  In  other  words,  the 
portion  of  prayer  which  is  Said  with  attention  is  only  written.  The 
sage  Abdul  Wahed  said :  The  portion  of  prayer  which  is  said  with 
humidity  of  mind  is  accepted.  This  is  the  consensus  of  opinion  of 
the  sages.  In  short,  earnestness  of  mind  is  the  life  of  prayer. 

LIFE  OF  PRAYER  AND  ITS 
INTERNAL  CONDITION 

There  are  many  works  signifying  the  life  of  prayer,  humility 
of  mind,  understanding  what  is  said,  honour,  hope  and  shame. 
(1)  The  meaning  of  humility  or  presence  of  mind  is  that  the  action 
and  word  must  be  the  same  in  mind  and  there  should  be  no  other 
thought  therein.  When  there  is  no  other  thing  in  mind  which  is 
concentrated  only  to  one  thing,  there  is  earnestness  or  presence 
of  mind.  (2)  When  mind  is  not  present  in  prayer,  it  does  not 
remain  idle  and  is  concentrated  to  the  thoughts  of  the  worldly 
affairs  with  which  it  is  immediately  concerned.  So  there  must  be 
firm  belief  that  prayer  is  a  stepping  stone  to  the  next  world  which 
is  everlasting.  Presence  of  mind  is  gained  only  when  it  is  realised 
and  the  world  is  considered  as  a  merely  temporary  abode  and 
insignificant. 

(2)  To  understand  the  meaning  of  words  uttered  and  to 
engage  intellect  to  understand  their  meanings.  The  medicine  of 
removing  various  thoughts  that  come  in  mind  in  prayers  is  to  cut 
the  root  or  to  remove  the  reasons  which  cause  different  thoughts. 
He  who  loves  a  thing  remembers  that  thing.  For  this  reason,  he 
who  loves  things  other  than  God  is  not  free  from  diverse 
thoughts  in  prayer. 

(3)  Honour  of  God  is  a  condition  of  mind.  It  rises  out  of 
acquaintance  of  two  things.  The  first  thing  is  the  knowledge  of 
the  glory  of  God.  This  is  the  root  of  faith,  because  the  mind  of  one 
who  does  not  firmly  believe  in  His  glory,  is  not  given 
encouragement  to  honour  Him.  The  second  thing  is  to  think 


142  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

oneself  helpless  and  insignificant.  From  the  knowledge  of  these 
two  things,  helplessness,  modesty  and  fear  of  God  arise  and  as  a 
result  honour  for  God  arises  in  mind. 

(4)  Fear  of  God  is  a  condition  of  mind  which  rises  out  of 
knowledge  of  God's  power  and  His  rewards  and  punishments. 
You  must  have  knowledge  that  if  God  would  have  destroyed  all 
past  and  present,  nothing  of  His  sovereignty  would  have 
reduced.  It  is  to  be  seen  along  with  that  whatever  dangers  and 
difficulties  God  gave  to  His  Prophet  and  friends,  these  are 
different  from  those  on  kinds,  rulers  and  emperors.  The  more  the 
knowledge  about  God,  the  more  would  be  the  fear  of  God.' 

(5)  Hope  in  God  rises  out  of  firm  faith  in  the  following 
matters — knowledge  of  God's  mercy  and  gifts,  knowledge  of  His 
creation  and  remembrance  of  Paradise  through  prayer. 

(6)  Shame  arises  out  of  knowledge  of  neglect  in  divine 
service  and  inability  to  fight  for  God.  Human  mind  becomes 
humble  in  proportion  of  certainty  of  faith. 

For  this  reason  Hazrat  Ayesha  said :  The  Prophet  talked  with 
us  and  we  also  talked  with  him  but  when  the  time  of  prayer  came, 
he  could  not  recognise  us  and  we  did  not  recognise  him.  It  is 
narrated  that  God  said  to  Moses  :  O  Moses,  when  you  want  to 
remember  Me,  remember  Me  in  such  a  way  that  your  limbs 
tremble  and  that  you  hold  Me  dear  at  the  time  of  remembrance 
and  rest  satisfied.  When  you  remember  Me,  keep  your  tongue 
behind  your  mind.  When  you  stand  before  Me,  stand  before  Me 
with  fearful  mind  like  the  meanest  slave  and  speak  with  Me  with 
the  tongue  of  a  truthful  man.  God  revealed  to  him  :  Tell  your 
disobedient  followers  to  remember  Me.  I  took  oath  upon  Myself 
that  I  shall  remember  one  who  remembers  Me.  When  Abraham 
stood  for  prayer,  voice  of  his  heart  was  heard  from  a  distance  of 
two  miles.  .An  individual  will  be  forgiven  in  the  next  world 
according  to  the  qualities  of  his  mind  and  not  of  his  body.  Nobody 
will  get  salvation  except  one  who  comes  with  a  sound  mind. 

PROFITABLE  MEDICINE  FOR 
MAKING  MIND  HUMBLE 

Know,  O  dear  reader,  that  a  believer  will  declare  God's  glory 
and  fear  Him,  hope  in  Him  and  be  ashamed  to  Him  for  his  sins. 
After  his  faith,  a  believer  will  not  be  free  from  these  conditions. 


I 


Vol-I  PRAYER  143 

Although  the  strength  of  his  mind  will  be  according  to  the 
strength  of  his  faith,  yet  there  is  no  other  cause  except  the 
following  ones  for  the  absence  of  his  mind,  random  thoughts, 
heedness,  absence  of  mind  in  Mozazat  and  absent-minded  ness 
in  prayer.  This  heedlessness  in  prayer  arises  out  of  engagement 
of  mind  in  various  thought.  The  medicine  of  keeping  the  mind 
present  is  to  remove  all  thoughts  and  primarily  to  remove  the 
root  of  these  thoughts.  There  are  two  bases  of  this  root  and  the 
external  root. 

EXTERNAL  ROOT:  Thought  catches  what  the  ear  hears  or 
the  eye  sees  and  mind  turns  towards  that  thought.  This  causes  to 
produce  other  thoughts.  So  the  root  of  thought  is  eye  and  then  the 
root  of  one  thought  is  another  thought.  He  whose  niyyat  is  fine 
and  aim  high  cannot  be  diverted  by  what  occurs  in  his  organs  or 
limbs,  but  he  who  is  weak  falls  a  prey  to  it.  Its  medicine  is  to  cut 
off  these  roots  and  to  shut  up  the  eyes,  to  pray  in  a  dark  room,  not 
to  keep  anything  in  front  which  may  attract  attention  and  not  to 
pray  in  a  decorated  place  or  a  decorated  and  painted  praying 
cloth.  For  this  reason  the  sages  used  to  do  divine  service  in  dark, 
narrow  and  unaspious  rooms. 

INTERNAL  ROOT  is  very  difficult.  The  thoughts  of  worldly 
matters  are  not  confined  to  one  subject.  It  goes  from  one  thought 
to  another.  If  they  shut  up  their  eyes,  it  does  not  do  them  any 
benefit.  The  way  to  remove  them  is  to  take  one's  mind  to 
understand  what  is  recited  in  prayer  and  to  stick  to  it  after  giving 
lip  all  other  thoughts.  The  Prophet  once  told  Osman-b-Ali 
Shaiba:  I  forgot  to  tell  you  to  cover  the  screens  of  variegated 
colours  in  the  room,  because  there  should  remain  nothing  in  the 
house  which  can  divert  attention  from  prayer.  If  the  rise  of 
thoughts  is  not  stopped  by  this  method,  then  there  is  another 
easy  method  to  prevent  it.  That  is  to  cut  off  the  root  cause  of  the 
disease.  It  has  been  narrated  that  Abu  Zaham  presented  a 
valuable  dress  of  variegated  colours  to  the  Holy  Prophet.  He  put 
on  it  and  said  prayer.  Afterwards  he  took  it  off  and  said  :  Take  it 
to  Abu  Zaham  as  it  has  diverted  my  attention  from  prayer.  The 
Prophet  had  a  ring  of  gold  in  his  hand  before  it  was  unlawful.  He 
threw  it  away  when  he  was  on  the  pulpit  and  said  :  My  sight  has 
fallen  on  it.  It  is  said  that  Hazrat  Abu  Tallaha  once  prayed  in  his 
own  garden  which  pleased  him  so  much  that  he  forgot  how  many 
rak'ats  he  prayed.  He  mentioned  it  to  the  Prophet  and  said  :  O 


144  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

Prophet  of  God,  I  wish  to  gift  this  garden.  The  Prophet  said :  Give 
it  to  whom  you  like.  Once  a  man  was  praying  in  his  garden  in 
which  dates  were  hanging.  It  pleased  him  so  much  that  he  forgot 
how  many  rak'ats  he  prayed.  He  mentioned  it  to  Hazrat  Osman 
who  said :  Spend  it  in  the  way  of  God.  Hazrat  Osman  purchased  it 
for  fifty  thousand  coins.  Thus  they  used  to  cut  off  the  root  of  their 
thoughts  and  expiated  the  loss  in  prayers.  This  is  the  medicine  for 
cutting  the  root  of  the  disease  of  mind.  To  bring  sexual  passion 
under  temporary  control  is  not  so  benefiting.  Its  root  must  be  cut  as 
it  baffles  the  whole  prayer.  The  following  illustration  is  given.  In  a 
certain  tree  numerous  sparrows  used  to  make  tremendous  noise  as 
they  had  their  nests  in  it.  A  traveler  began  to  drive  them  away  being 
disgusted  with  their  noise.  They  fled  away  for  the  time  being  but 
came  again  to  make  greater  noise.  It  he  wants  to  get  himself  relieved 
of  the  noise  permanently,  he  should  cut  the  tree.  The  sparrows  will 
make  noise  till  the  tree  lasts.  Similarly  attachment  to  a  thing  may 
temporarily  be  removed  from  mind,  but  it  will  come  again  and 
disturb  the  mind.  Attachment  to  the  world  is  the  root  of  all 
thoughts,  the  primary  cause  of  all  losses.  If  one  wants  a  peaceful 
mind  in  prayer,  he  should  cut  off  all  attachments  of  the  world.  If  one 
is  engaged  in  worldly  matters,  he  should  not  expect  to  get  taste  in 
invocations. 

MEANING  OF  DIFFERENT  ITEMS  OF  PRAYER  'AZAN': 

When  you  hear  the  call  to  prayer,  think  of  the  general  call  on  the 
Resurrection  day  and  look  to  your  external  and  internal  matters 
when  replying  and  make  haste.  Those  who  respond  in  haste  to 
this  call,  will  get  reply" with  mercy  on  that  fearful  day.  So  keep 
your  mind  on  Azan. 

MEANING  OF  CLEANLINESS:  When  you  make  your 
praying  cloth  pure  and  clean  and  your  body  clean  of  impurities', 
don't  be  indifferent  to  make  your  mind  pure.  Make  it  pure  of 
impure  ideas  and  thoughts  as  far  as  possible.  Repent  for  what 
you  have  failed  to  do  and  determine  not  to  do  it  in  future.  So 
make  your  heart  pure  as  it  is  the  object  of  sight  of  your  Lord. 

Meaning  of  covering  private  parts.  The  meaning  of  covering 
private  parts  is  to  cover  your  private  parts  from  the  sight  of  men. 
God  looks  to  your  heart.  So  cover  the  faults  of  your  heart  and 
know  that  it  is  not  secret  from  the  sight  of  God.  Your  repentance, 
shame  and  fear  will  expiate  it.  Stand  before  God  just  like  a 


Vol-I  PRAYER  145 

fugitive  slave  who  returned  to  his  master  being  repentant  with 
humility  of  spirit  and  bent  down  head. 

MEANING  OF  FACING  THE  KA'BA:  The  meaning  of 
turning  your  face  towards  the  Ka'ba  is  to  turn  your  mind  towards 
God  after  taking  it  off  from  all  directions  and  all  evil  thoughts. 
Move  the  external  organs  to  move  your  secret  mind  and  keep 
them  under  control  of  mind.  Keep  the  face  of  your  mind  towards 
God  along  with  the  face  of  your  body.  The  Prophet  said :  When  a 
man  stands  in  prayer  and  directs  his  hope,  face  and  mind 
towards  God,  he  comes  out  of  his  prayer  as  on  the  day  his  mother 
gave  birth  to  him. 

MEANING  OF  STANDING  IN  PRAYER:  Its  external 
meaning  is  to  stand  before  God  with  body  and  mind.  You  shall 
*  bend  down  your  head  which  is  higher  than  your  other  limbs.  The 
meaning  of  this  bending  down  of  your  head  is  to  bend  down  your, 
mind  free  from  all  self-conceit  and  pride.  Know  that  you  are 
standing  before  the  mighty  and  greatest  Emperor.  You  fear  king 
but  you  don't  fear  God  although  He  is  fit  to  be  feared  most.  For 
this  reason  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  asked  the  Prophet :  How  should  we 
be  shameful  to  God  ?  He  said  :  You  should  be  shameful  to  God 
just  as  you  become  shameful  to  see  the  most  God-fearing  man 
among  you. 

MEANING  OF  NIYYAT:  Promise  firmly  that  you  will 
respond  to  God's  orders  through  prayer,  make  it  perfect  and 
make  niyyat  sincerely  for  Him  and  keep  an  eye  with  whom  you 
are  speaking  secretly,  how  you  talk  and  for  what  matter.  At  this 
time  your  head  should  perspire,  your  limbs  should  tremble  and 
the  colour  of  your  face  should  become  changed. 

MEANING  OF  TAKBIR:  When  your  tongue  utter  Takbir,  let 
not  your  mind  speak  falsehood.  Your  mind  should  correspond 
with  your  tongue  in  declaring  Him  to  be  the  greatest.  If  you  have 
got  in  mind  something  which  is  greater  than  God,  God  will  attest 
that  you  are  a  liar. 

MEANING  OF  OPENING  DOS:  'I  turn  my  face  towards  the 
Creator  of  heavens  and  earth.'  To  turn  face  towards  the  Ka'ba 
means  to  turn  it  towards  God.  God  exists  every  where  and  so  to 
turn  towards  the  Ka'ba  means  to  turn  towards  the  only  object  of 
your  life,  towards  the  Almighty  after  giving  up  all  things.  When 
you  recite  1  am  not  of  the  polytheists/  your  mind  harbours  then 


146  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

secret  shirk  as  God  says  :  If  any  body  wishes  to  meet  with  his 
Lord,  let  him  do  good  deeds  and  do  not  set  up  any  partner  in  His 
divine  service.'  This  was  revealed  with  respect  to  a  person  who 
wants  divine  service  and  also  the  praise  of  men.  So  take  care  of 
this  shirk.  When  you  utter — 'My  life  and  my  death  are  for  God', 
know  then  that  this  condition  is  of  the  slave  who  safeguard  the 
existence  of  his  master  in  lieu  of  his  existence.  When  you  utter — 1 
seek  refuge  to  God,'  you  should  give  up  your  low  desires  and 
temptations.  You  should  then  take  firm  resolution  to  take  refuge 
to  the  fort  of  God  giving  up  the  fort  of  the  devil.  The  Prophet  said 
:  God  said  There  no  deity  but  God'  is  My  fort.  He  who  enters  My 
fort  is  safe  from  My  punishment.  God  protects  one  who  has  got 
no  deity  hut  God.  He  who  takes  his  low  desires  as  his  deity  lives 
in  the  fort  of  the  devil  and  not  in  the  fort  of  God. 

MEANING  OF  QURAN  READING:  Regarding  this  matter, 
men  are  of  three  classes — (1)  he  who  moves  his  tongue  but  his 
mind  is  heedless,  (2)  he  who  moves  his  tongue  and  his  mind 
follows  his  tongue,  this  is  the  rank  of  the  fortunate,  (3)  he  whose 
tongue  is  directed  first  towards  understanding  the  meaning  and 
then  his  minds  take  his  tongue  as  its  servant.  Tongue  will  give 
expression  of  mind. 

MEANING  OF  OTHER  ITEMS:  When  you  utter— 'I  begin  in 
the  name  of  the  Most  Compassionate,  the  Most  Merciful',  seek 
first  the  favour  of  God.  When  you  say  Thou  are  the  Lord  of 
Judgment  day,'  understand  then  that  there  is  no  sovereignty 
except  His  sovereignty  and  fear  His  judgment.  Express  your 
helplessness  by  saying  Thee  do  we  worship'  and  understand 
that  religious  acts  do  not  become  easy  except  with  His  assistance. 

It  is  said  that  when  Zarrah-b-Auf  finished  reciting  'when  the 
trumpet  will  be  blown,  he  fell  down  senseless  and  died.  When 
Ibrahim  Nahhyi  heard  this  verse,  'when  the  sky  will  be  rent 
asunder'  he  began  to  tremble  seriously.  So  read  the  Quran  slowly 
and  attentively  so  that  it  becomes  easy  to  understand.  The 
Prophet  said  :  God  remains  with  the  praying  man  till  he  does  not 
look  to  and  fro.  As  it  is  your  duty  to  protect  your  head  and  eyes, 
so  it  is  compulsory  on  you  to  restrain  your  mind  in  prayer  from 
thoughts  other  than  God.  When  you  look  towards  any  other 
thing,  remember  then  that  God  sees  your  condition.  If  you  are 
absent  minded  at  the  time  of  monazat,  it  is  very  bad.  Keep  the 
fear  of  God  within  your  mind.  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  used  to  stand  in 


Vol-I  PRAYER  147 

prayer  just  like  a  statue.  Some  used  to  remain  in  Ruku  like  a 
motionless  stone,  so  mush  so  that  birds  sat  on  his  head.  The 
Prophet  said :  Pray  as  if  it  is  your  farewell  prayer,  having  in  mind 
fear  and  shame  owing  to  defects  in  prayers  and  fear  that  your 
prayer  may  not  be  accepted  and  that  it  may  be  thrown  on  your 
face  with  your  express  and  secret  sins.  There  is  in  Hadis  that 
when  a  man  stands  in  prayer,  God  lifts  up  the  screen  between 
Him  and  His  servant  and  faces  him.  The  angels  climb  upon  his 
two  shouldes  and  pray  in  horizon  along  with  him  and  says 
'Ameen'  along  with  his  invocation.  They  spread  virtues  over  the 
scalp  of  his  head  from  above  the  horizon.  A  proclaimer 
proclaims:  If  this  invoker  had  known  to  whom  he  is  invoking,  he  . 
would  not  have  looked  to  and  fro.  The  doors  of  heaven  are 
opened  up  for  a  praying  man  and  God  takes  pride  before  His 
angels  for  the  praying  man.  So  the  doors  of  heaven  are  opened  up 
for  him  and  the  face  of  God  comes  before  his  face.  In  other  words, 
his  Kashf  is  opened.  There  is  written  in  the  Torah :  O  son  of  Adam 
don't  be  baffled  to  stand  up  before  Me  in  prayer  in  weeping  state, 
because  then  I  come  near  your  mind  and  you  also  see  My  light 
unseen.  He  said:  The  softness,  weeping  and  victory  which  a 
praying  man  feels  in  his  mind,  bespeak  of  the  advent  of  God  in 
his  mind.  When  His  nearness  is  not  the  nearness  of  space,  there  is 
no  meaning  of  it  except  the  nearness  of  mercy,  guidance  and 
removal  of  evils. 

God  says  :  Those  believers  got  salvation  who  fear  God  in 
their  prayers.  Then  He  praised  them  with  their  speciality  of 
prayer.  It  is  connected  with  God  fear.  Then  he  described  the 
qualities  of  those  who  got  salvation  through  prayer,  as  God  says  : 
Those  who  guard  their  prayers,  Then  He  says :  They  will  inherit 
the  garden  of  Ferdous.  They  will  abide  therein.  If  tongue  is 
moved  with  inattention,  can  this  reward  be  achieved  ?  The 
praying  one  will  inherit  the  gardens,  they  will  directly  see  divine 
light  and  they  will  enjoy  the  happiness  of  nearness. 

STORIES  OF  THE  PRAYERS  OF 
GOD-FEARING  MEN 

Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  God-fear  is  the  result  of  real  faith 
and  belief.  He  who  has  keen  given  it,  fears  God  in  and  out  of 
prayer,  when  he  remains  alone  and  even  at  the  time  of  calls  of 
nature,  because  he  who  fears  God  knows  it  well  that  He  knows 
the  condition  of  mind  and  his  sins  and  faults.  Fear  grows  in  the 


148  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

mind  of  one  who  knows  this  and  it  is  not  limited  only  in  prayer.  It 
is  narrated  that  a  sage  did  not  raise  up  his  head  for  forty  years 
being  ashamed  and  fearful  of  God.  The  saint  Rabi-b-Khasem 
used  to  close  up  his  eyes  so  tightly  that  the  people  would  think 
that  he  was  blind.  He  used  to  go  to  the  house  of  Ibn  Masud  for 
twenty  years.  Whenever  his  female  slave  saw  him,  she  used  to 
say  to  her  master.  Your  blind  friend  has  come.  At  this  Hazrat  Ibn  . 
Masud  used  to  laugh.  Whenever  he  used  to  knock  at  the  door,  the 
female  slave  would  come  to  him  and  see  him  with  closed  eyes. 
Hazrat  Ibn  Masud  told  him  :  Give  good  news  to  those  who  are 
humble  By  God.  Had  the  Prophet  seen  you  he  would  have  surely 
been  pleased  with  you.  One  day  he  went  with  Ibn  Masud  to  the 
shop  of  a  blacksmith.  When  he  saw  him  blowing  and  fire  coming 
out,  he  at  once  fell  down  senseless.  Ibn  Masud  sat  near  his  head 
up  to  the  prayer  time  but  still  he  did  not  regain  his  senses.  Then 
he  bore  him  to  his  house  and  he  did  not  recover  sense  till  his 
prayer  for  five  times  passed  away.  Ibn  Masud  sat  by  his  head  and 
said :  By  God  this  is  real  God-fear. 

The  saint  Rubi  said :  I  did  not  observe  such  prayer  in  which  I 
had  other  thing  in  mind  except  what  I  uttered  and  what  was  said 
to  me.  Hazrat  Amer-b-Abdullah  feared  God  in  prayer  very-much. 
When  he  prayed,  his  daughter  beat  drum  and  the  women  of  the 
house  hold  conversation  but  he  did  not  hear  them.  One  day  he 
was  told  :  Does  your  mind  think  any  matter  in  prayer  ?  He  said, 
Yes,  it  thinks  about  its  stay  before  God  and  going  from  this  world 
into  another  world,  He  was  told  :  Do  you  see  what  we  generally 
see  about  the  affairs  of  the  world  ?  He  said  :  I  consider  it  better 
that  my  teeth  should  go  from  one  side  to  another  than  what  you 
see.  This  is  not  attention  in  prayer. 

Moslem-b-Yasar  was  one  of  them,  it  is  said  that  while  he 
was  one  day  praying  within  a  mosque,  one  of  its  corners  fell 
down  but  he  did  not  come  to  know  of  it.  The  limb  of  a  certain 
pious  man  was  damaged  and  it  required  operation  but  it  was 
not  at  all  possible.  Some  said  :  When  he  prays,  he  will  not  be 
able  to  feel  its  pangs,  Accordingly  the  limb  was  operated 
while  he  was  engaged  in  prayer.  Some  said  :  Prayer  belongs 
to  the  next  world.  When  you  enter  prayer,  go  out  of  the 
world.  Hazrat  Abu  Darda  said  :  It  is  the  rule  of  religion  that 
when  a  man  goes  to  prayer,  he  should  perform  all  his 
necessary  things,  so  that  his  mind  becomes  free  from 


Vol-I  PRAYER  149 

thoughts.  The  Prophet  said :  The  prayer  of  a  man  is  not  written 
except  its  one  third,  half,  one-fourth,  one  fifth,  one  sixth  or  one 
tenth.Hesaid:Whatissaidinprayerwithunderstandingisonly 
written  for  him,  Hazrat  Omar  once  said  from  his  pulpit :  The 
headoftwosidesofamanbecomesgrey,yethedoesnotobserve 
prayer  for  pleasure  of  God.  He  was  asked :  How  does  it  occur  ? 
He  said :  HisGod-f  ear,  modesty  and  his  self-  surrender  for  God 
do  no  t  become  perfect.  Abid  Ahiya  was  onceasked :  What  is  the 
meaning  of  heedlessness  in  prayer  ?  He  said  :  One  commits 
mistakes  in  his  prayer  and  does  not  know  how  many  rak'ats  he 
has  prayed.  The  sage  Hasan  Basari  said  in  its  explanation :  He 
forgets  the  time  of  prayer.  Jesus  Christ  said  :  God  says  :  My 
servant  gets  salvation  by  observing  compulsory  duties,  but  he 
gains  My  nearness  by  doing  optional  duties.  The  Prophet  said : 
God  says  :  My  servant  will  not  get  salvation  till  he  fulfills  the 
compulsoryJuties. 

SECTION  4 

IMAMATE 

There  are  six  duties  of  Imam  before  prayer.  (1)  He  shallnot  be 
an  Imam  of  people  unless  they  give  consent  to  it.  If  they  differ,  an 
Imam  would  be  elected  by  a  majority.  If  the  minority  are' 
religious  and  good,  their  opinion  should  be  followed.  There  is  in 
Had  is  :  The  prayer  of  three  persons  will  not  go  up  beyond  their 
heads  (1)  a  fugitive  slave,  (2)  a  woman  whose  husband  is 
displeased  with  her,  and  (3)  an  Imam  with  whom  his  people  are 
dis-satisfied.  The  Imam  is  a  guarantee  for  his  followers,  (2)  When 
a  man  is  given  option  between  Azan  and  Imamate,  he  should 
prefer  Imamate  as  the  office  of  an  Imam  ii  better  than  that  of  a 
Muazzem.  Some  say  that  Azan  is  better  as  there  are  many  merits 
of  Azan.  The  Prophet  said  :  An  Imam  is  a  surety  for  his  followers 
and  Muazzen  is  an  object  of  trust.  He  said :  The  Imam  is  an  object 
of  trust.  When  he  bends  down,  the  followers  bend  down  and 
when  he  prostrates,  they  prostrate.  He  said  :  When  he  fulfills  the 
prayer,  it  is  for  him  and  for  them  also.  If  there  is  defect  in  it,  it 
goes  against  him  and  against  them  also.  For  this  reason,  the 
Prophet  said  :  O  God,  show  the  straight  path  to  the  Imams  and 
forgive  the  Muazzens. 

The  Prophet  said:  Paradise  becomes  sure  for  one  without 
account  who  is  Imam  for  seven  years.  He  who  proclaims  Azan  for 


150  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

forty  years  'will  enter  into  Paradise  without  account.  The 
Prophet,  Hazrats  Abu  Bakr  and  Omar  used  to  fix  salary  for  an 
Imam.  The  Prophet  said.  One  day  of  a  just  ruler  is  better  than 
divine  service  for  seventy  years.  The  Prophet  said  :  Your  Imams 
are  your  intercessors.  He  said  :  Your  Imam  are  representatives  of 
God  on  your  behalf.  If  you  wish  to  purify  your  prayer,  place  in 
front  the  best  man  among  you.  Some  earlier  sages  said :  There  is 
no  better  man  after  the  Prophet  than  the  learned  except  the 
praying  Imams,  as  they  stand  between  God  and  His  servants, 
some  with  Prophethood,  some  with  learning  and  some  with 
prayer,  the  pillar  of  religion.  By  this  proof,  the  companions 
elected  Abu  Bakr  as  their  Imam.  They  then  said  :  We  have 
considered  that  prayer  is  a  pillar  of  religion  on  whom  the  Prophet 
was  pleased  for  this  pillar.  They  did  not  select  Bilal  as  the  Prophet 
selected  him  for  Azan.  It  is  reported  that  a  man  asked  the  Prophet: 
Give  me  clue  to  such  an  action  which  will  lead  me  to  Paradise.  He 
said :  Be  Muazzen.  He  said :  I  can't  do  it.  he  said :  Then  be  Imam.  He 
said :  I  can'tdo  it  He  said :  Then  pray  behind  an  Imam. 

(3)  The  Imam  shall  observe  the  times  of  prayers  and  shall 
pray  for  pleasure  of  God  in  their  earliest  times.  The  Prophet 
said :  The  Imam  who  prays  at  the  last  time  of  a  prayer,  does  not 
miss  it,  but  what  he  misses  in  its  earliest  time  is  better  than  the 
world  and  its  treasures.  It  is  not  good  to  delay  prayer  in 
expectation  of  a  greater  number  of  men.  One  day,  there  was 
some  delay  for  the  morning  prayer  on  the  part  of  the  Prophet 
when  he  was  in  a  journey.  The  companions  did  not  wait  for  the 
Prophet  when  he  made  delay  in  making  ablution.  The  Prophet 
then  said :  You  have  done  better.  Do  it  always. 

(4)  Act  as  an  Imam  for  the  sake  of  God  and  fulfill  with  good 
manners  the  trust  of  God  in  the  other  conditions  of  prayer  and 
act  as  an  Imam  with  sincere  intention  and  don't  take  for  it 
remuneration.  The  Prophet  said  Osman-b-Affan  :  Appoint 
such  a  Muazzen  who  will  not  take  remuneration  for  his  Azan. 
Azan  guides  to  the  path  of  prayer  and  it  is  better  not  to  receive 
its  remuneration.  Hazrat  Sufiyan  said  :  Pray  behind  a  religious 
or  irreligious  man  except  behind  habitual  drunkard,  or  cursed 
man,  or  one  disobedient  to  parents,  or  an  invocator  or  a 
fugitive  slave. 

(5)  Don't  utter  Takbir  till  row  is  arranged  straight  and  look  to 
right  and  left.  The  Prophet  said  :  A  Muazzen  should  wait 


Vol-I  PRAYER  151 

between  Azan  and  Aqamat  for  so  long  as  an  eater  eats  or  a  man 
passes  calls  of  nature.  So  he  prohibited  to  retain  urine  and  stool. 
He  ordered  to  finish  dinners  for  peace  of  mind  before  Isha 
prayer. 

(6)  An  Iman  shall  raise  his  voice  in  the  time  of  Takbir 
Tahrima  and  other  Takbirs  as  well  but  a  follower  will  utter  it  in  a 
low  voice.  The  Imam  has  got  three  duties  at  the  time  of  Quran 
reading  in  prayer.  (1)  He  should  recite  the  opening  Doa  and- 
Aauzobillah  in  silent  voice  and  recite  loudly  the  Fateha  and  Suras 
in  congregational  prayer  of  Fajr,  Isha  and  Magrib.  One  should  do 
it  even  at  the  time  when  he  prays  alone.  When  he  recites  Ameen 
with  voice,  the  followers  will  recite  it  loudly. 

SECTIONS 

MERITS  OF  JUMMA  PRAYER 

Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  Jumma  day  is  a  holy  day.  God, 
honoured  Islam  therewith  and  gave  glory  tor  the  Muslims.  God 
says  :  When  there  is  Azan  for  prayer  on  the  Jumma  day,  run 
towards  remembrance  of  God  and  give  up  buy  and  sale.  The 
Prophet  said  :  God  has  made  compulsory  on  you  on  this  day  of 
mine  and  in  this  place  of  mine.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  a  man  loses 
three  Jumas  without  any  excuse,  God  puts  a  seal  in  his  mind.  In 
another  narration  :  He  throws  Islam  on  his  back.  The  Prophet 
said :  Gebriel  came  to  me  with  a  clean  mirror  in  his  hand  and  said 
:  This  is  Jumma.  God  has  made  it  obligatory  on  you,  so  that  it  may 
be  a  festival  for  you  and  after  you  for  you  followers.  I  said  :  What 
good  there  is  for  us  in  it  ?  He  said  :  You  have  got  an  suspicious 
time  in  it.  If  a  man  seeks  anything  to  God  at  this  time,  God  has 
promised  that  He  will  give  it  to  him.  If  he  is  deprived  of  that, 
many  additional  things  are  given  to  him  in  that  connection.  If  any 
man  wants  to  save  himself  from  any  evil  on  that  day,  God  saves 
him  from  a  greater  calamity  or  a  like  calamity  which  has  been 
decreed  on  him.  Jumma  day  is  the  best  day  to  us  and  we  shall  call 
it  on  the  Resurrection  day  as  the  day  of  grace.  I  asked  him :  What 
object  is  there  in  calling  it  as  the  day  of  grace  ?  He  said :  Your  God 
has  made  a  valley  in  paradise  made  of  white  musk.  When  the 
Jumma  day  comes,  God  descends  on  His  Throne  in  Hlyyin  and 
sheds  His  lusture  and  they  look  on  towards  His  august  face.  The 
Prophet  said  :  The  sun  rose  for  the  first  time  on  the  best  Jumma 
day  and  Hazrat  Adam  was  created  on  that  day.  He  entered 


152  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

Paradise  first  on  that  day  and  he  was  thrown  in  to  this  world  on 
that  day  and  his  pensance  was  accepted  on  that  day.  He  died  on 
this  day  and  Resurrection  will  take  place  on  this  day.  This  day  is  a 
day  of  blessing  to  God.  The  heavens  and  angels  have  been  given 
names  on  this  day.  There  is  a  Hadis  that  God  will  release  six  lacs 
of  men  from  Hell  on  this  day.  The  Prophet  said :  When  the  Jumma 
day  is  safe,  all  the  days  remain  safe.  He  said :  If  a  man  dies  on  the 
Jumma  day  or  night,  the  rewards  of  one  martyrdom  are  written 
for  him  and  the  punishment  of  grave  is  forgiven. 

CONDITIONS  OF  JUMMA  PRAYER 

Ten  rules  should  be  observed  on  the  Jumma  day.  (1)  It  is 
better  to  prepare  for  the  Jumma  day  from  Thursday.  After  Asr  of 
Thursday,  turn  attention  to  invocation,  seeking  forgiveness  and 
Tasbih  as  the  merits  of  this  time  are  equal  to  those  of  the 
auspicious  unknown  time  of  Friday,  (2)  Make  your  clothes  clean 
on  this  day,  use  scent  and  keep  your  mind  free  from  anxieties  so 
that  you  may  rise  up  with  a  free  mind  on  Friday  morning.  Try  to 
fast  on  this  day  as  there  is  a  great  merit  in  it.  Pass  Thursday  night 
by  reading  the  Quran  and  praying.  The  Prophet  said :  God  shows 
mercy  on  the  man  who  rises  in  the  morning  and  awakes  others, 
takes  bath  and  causes  the  baths  of  others  (3)  Take  bath  in  the 
morning  of  Friday.  The  Prophet  said  :  It  is  obligatory  on  every 
mature  man  to  take  bath  on  Friday.  He  said :  Let  one  who  attends 
Jumma  take  bath,  he  said  :  Let  one  male  or  female  who  attends 
Jumma  prayer  take  bath. 

(4)  If  is  commendable  to  take  recourse  to  beauty  on  this  day 
to  take  fine  dress,  to  be  pure  and  to  use  scent.  Regarding  purity, 
cleanse  your  teeth,  cut  your  hairs/  slip- your  mustache  and  do 
everything  necessary  for  purity.  Hazrat  Ibn  Masud  said:  If  a  man 
manicures  nails  on  the  Jumma  day,  God  takes  out  disease 
therefrom  and  gives  him  cure  therein.  Regarding  dress,  wear 
white  dress  as  it  is  dear  to  God.  To  use  turban  is  commendable. 
The  Prophet  said:  God  and  His  angels  bless  those  who  wear 
turban  on  the  Jumma  day. 

(5)  It  is  commendable  to  go  to  the  congregational  mosque  in 
the  morning.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  goes  to  Jumma  in  the 
early  part  gets  rewards  of  the  sacrifice  of  a  camel  and  he  who  goes 
at  the  second  time  gets  the  rewards  of  the  sacrifice  of  a  cow  and 
he  who  goes  at  the  third  time  gets  the  reward  of  the  sacrifice  of  a 


Vol-I  PRAYER  153 

goat  and  he  who  goes  at  the  fourth  time  gets  the  reward  of  the 
sacrifice  of  a  cock.  He  who  goes  at  the  fifth  stage  gets  the  reward 
of  the  charity  of  an  egg.  When  the  Imam  gets  up  for  khutba, 
record  is  folded  up  and  pen  is  lifted  up.  The  angels  gather 
together  wear  the  pulpit  and  hear  the  Zikr  of  God.  The  Prophet 
said:  There  are  three  things.  If  the  people  had  known  what  good 
there  is  therein,  they  would  have  come  to  search  it  like  a 
camel-Azan,  first  row  and  going  to  the  congregational  mosque  at 
dawn.  In  the  first  century,  the  pathway  became  full  of  men  from 
early  hours  up  to  dawn.  The  prophet  used  to  come  out  with  light 
and  the  mosque  became  filled  up  with  men  like  the  day  of  I'd.  It 
became  obsolete  afterwards.  It  is  said  that  the  innovation  of 
giving  up  the  practice  of  going  to  the  mosque  at  dawn  first 
entered  into  Islam.  It  is  a  matter  of  regret  that  the  Jews  and  the 
Christians  go  to  their  synayogues  and  churches  at  dawn  on 
Saturday  and  Sunday  respectively  and  the  worldly  people  go  to 
markets  for  buy  and  sale  at  dawn  but  those  who  seek  the  next 
world  cannot  go  to  mosque  a  t  dawn. 

(6)  Ranks  of  entering  a  mosque:  Nobody  should  go  to  the 
front  row  of  the  mosque  crossing  the  necks  of  men.  The  Prophet 
said:  On  the  resurrect  on  day  such  a  person  will  be  made  a  bridge 
and  the  people  would  tread  over  him.  Once  when  the  Prophet 
was  reciting  khutba,  he  noticed  that  a  man  was  advancing 
towards  the  front  row  after  crossing  over  the  necks  of  man.  After 
finishing  prayer,  the  Prophet  called  him  and  said:  O  such  a 
person,  what  prevented  you  to  pray  Jumma  with  me  today.  He 
said:  O  Prophet  of  God,  I  prayed  with  you.  The  Prophet  said: 
Have  I  not  found  you  to  cross  over  the  necks  of  men?  He  hinted 
by  this  that  his  action  has  become  void.  In  another  narration,  the 
Prophet  said  to  him:  What  prevented  you  to  pray  with  me?  He 
said:  O  Prophet  of  God,  have  you  not  seen  me?  The  Prophet  said: 
I  have  seen  you  coming  late  and  giving  trouble  to  the  people 
present.  In  other  words  you  have  delayed  to  come  at  dawn  and 
have  given  trouble  to  those  present. 

(7)  Don't  go  to  the  mosque  by  the  front  of  a  praying  man, 
keep  wall  or  pillar  or  stick  in  front  when  praying  so  that  the 
people  may  not  pass  by  your  front.  The  Prophet  said:  His  waiting 
for  40  years  is  better  than  his  going  by  the  front  of  men.  The 
Prophet  said:  It  is  better  for  any  man  to  be  powdered  to  earth  to 


154  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

be  blown  off  by  air  like  refuges  than  to  cross  the  front  of  a  praying 
man. 

(8)  Try  to  take  seat  in  the  first  row.  There  is  in  Hadis:  If  a  man 
takes  bath  and  tells  another  to  take  bath,  if  a  man  rises  early  and 
makes  another  awake  early  and  goes  near  the  Imam  and  hears, 
the  sins  which  he  has  committed  between  two  Jumma  and 
additional  three  days  become  expiration  for  him. 

(9)  Prayer  should  be  stopped  at  the  time  when  the  Imam  gets 
upon  the  pulpit.  The  prophet  said:  If  a  man  says  to  another  at  the 
time  when  the  Imam  delivers  address  'Be  silent',  he  holds  useless 
talk.  The  Jumma  of  one  who  holds  useless  talk  is  not  performed. 

(10)  Follow  the  Imam  in  Jumma.  When  the  Jumma  is  finished, 
recite  before  talk  the  chapters  'Alham  do  Lillah'  seven  times, 
'Ikhlas'  seven  times.,  'Falaq'  seven  times  and  Nas  seven  times.  A 
certain  sage  said:  He  who  does  this  remains  safe  up  to  the  next 
Jumma  from  the  devil. 

GOOD  DEEDS  ON  JUMMA  DAY 

(1)  Be  present  at  the  assembly  of  learning  at  dawn  Or  after 
prayer.  There  is  ahadis  that  to  remain  present  in  an  assembly  of 
learning  is  better  than  optional  prayer  of  one  thousand  rak'ats. 

(2)  To  medidate  well  for  the  auspicious  moment.  There  is  in 
an  well  known  Hadis:  There  is  a  time  on  Jumma  day  in  which  a 
Muslim  is  granted  what  he  seeks.  There  is  in  another  Hadis:  He 
who  prays  does  not  lose  it.  There  is  difference  of  opinion  about 
this  auspicious  moment.  Some  say  it  is  at  the  time  of  sun-rise. 
Some  say  it  is  after  noon,  some  say,  it  is  at  the  time  of  Azan.  Some 
say  it  is  when  the  Imam  gets  upon  his  pulpit  and  begins  his 
address.  Some  say  it  is  at  the  last  time  of  Asr  prayer.  Some  say  it 
spreads  for  the  day  like  the  Blessed  night.  So  one  who  seeks  it 
should  remain  in  meditation  throughout  the  day.  Some  say  it  is 
intermingled  with  every  time  of  Jumma  day.  This  is  the  correct 
view.  This  is  supported  by  the  following  Hadis:  There  is  a  day 
among  your  days  when  your  Lord  gives  out  breath.  Be  prepared 
for  that  day.  This  is  Jumma  day  among  the  days. 

(3)  It  is  commendable  to  recite  Darud  this  day  on  the  Prophet. 
The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  sends  Darud  to  me  eighty  times  on 
Jumma  day,  God  forgives  his  minor  faults  for  eighty  years,  He 
was  asked:  O  Prophet  of  God,  what  is  Darud  upon  you?  He  said: 


Vol-I  PRAYER  155 

Say:  O  God,  bless  Muhammad,  Thy  servant,  Thy  Prophet  and 
Thy  Apostle,  the  illiterate  Prophet. 

(4)  Recite  the  Quran  more  in  this  day  specially  chapter  Qahaf . 
The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  recites  the  chapter  Qahaf  on  the 
Jumma  day  or  night,  he  is  given  such  light  which  is  visible  from 
Mecca  and  his  sins  are  forgiven  up  to  the  next  Jumma  and  the 
merits  of  three  days  in  addition  are  given  to  him  and  seventy 
thousand  angels  bless  him  till  dawn.  He  is  saved  from  diseases, 
pains  of  stomach,  pleurisy,  tuberculosis  and  the  trials  of  Dajjal. 

(5)  It  is  commendable  to  recite  Darud  at  the  time  of  entering 
mosque  and  not  to  sit  till  one  prays  four  rakats  reciting  therein 
Ikhlas  fifty  times  in  each  rakat.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  prays 
such,  will  not  die  till  he  is  shown  his  place  in  paradise. 

(6)  It  is  commendable  to  give  charities  on  Juman  day.  The 
merits  are  increased  manifold. 

(7)  Keep  yourself  engaged  in  divine  service  for  the  whole 
Jumma  day  after  giving  up  worldly  duties. 

SECTION  6 

PRAYERS  OTHER  THAN  OBLIGATORY  PRAYERS 

There  are  three  kinds  of  other  prayers  -  Sunnat,  Mustahab 
(commendable)  and  Nafl  (optional).  Sunnat  prayer  is  such 
prayer  which  the  Prophet  observed  for  all  times,  such  as  the 
prayers  after  obligatory  prayers.  Mustahab  prayer  is  such  prayer 
of  which  the  excellence  has  been  described  by  Hadis  and  which 
the  Prophet  did  not  observe  always.  Nafl  prayer  is  such  prayer 
which  does  not  fall  within  the  first  two  categories.  What  a  man 
prays  willingly  for  pleasure  of  God  other  than  the  above  prayers 
is  optional. 

SUNNAT  PRAYER:  There  are  eight  Sunnat  prayers  among 
which  five  are  said  along  with  five  times  of  prayer  and  three  in 
addition  -  forenoon  prayer,  Tahajjud  prayer  and  prayer  between 
Magribandlsha. 

(1)  Two  rakat  sunnat  before  Fajr  prayer.  The  Prophet  said: 
Two  rak'ats  of  Sunnat  prayer  before  Fajr  is  better  than  the  world 
and  what  is  in  it. 


156  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

(2)  Six  rak'ats  of  Sunnat  prayers  of  Zuhr-four  rak'ats  before  it 
and  two  after  it.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  prays  four  rak'ats 
after  declining  of  the  sun  and  makes  Ruku  and  prostration  well 
and  recites  the  Quran  well,  seventy  thousand  angels  pray. for  him 
and  seek  forgiveness  for  him  up  to  night.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a 
man  prays  12  rak'ats  daily  besides  the  obligatory  prayers,  a 
building  will  be  built  for  him  in  Paradise  -  two  rak'ats  before 
Fajar,  4  rakats  before  Zuhr  and  two  rak'ats  before  Asr  and  two 
rakats  after  Magrib. 

(3)  Four  rak'ats  before  Asr.  The  Prophet  said:  O  God,  have 
mercy  on  the  man  who  prays  four  rak'ats  before  Asr. 

(4)  Two  rak'ats  after  magrib. 

(5)  Four  rak'ats  after  Isha.  Hazrat  Ayesha  reported  that  the 
Prophet  used  to  go  to  bed  after  praying  4  rak'ats  after  Isha. 

Many  learned  men  said  after  collecting  all  traditions  that 
there  are  seventeen  rak'ats  of  Sunnat  prayers  -  two  rak'ats  before 
Fajr,  four  rak'ats  before  Zuhr  and  two  rak'ats  after  it,  four  rak'ats 
before  Asr,  two  rak'ats  after  Magrib  and  three  rak'ats  after  Isha. 

(6)  Bitr  prayer:  Hazrat  Anas  said:  The  Prophet  used  to  pray 
Uiree  rak'ats  of  Bitr  after  Isha  reciting  therein  'Sabbehesme 
Rubbihil  Ala'  in  the  first  rak'at,  Kaferun  in  the  second  raka't  and 
Ikhlas  in  the  third  rakat. 

(7)  Forenoon  prayer:  It  is  up  to  eight  rak'ats.  Hazrat  Ayesha 
said  that  the  Prophet  used  to  pray  four  rak'ats  in  the  forenoon 
and  sometimes  increased  it. 

(8)  Prayer  between  Magrib  and  Isha.  The  Prophet  said: 
There  are  six  rakat  prayers  between  Magrib  and  Isha  of  which  the 
merits  are  great.  The  Prophet  said  that  this  prayer  is  included 
with  the  prayer  of  Awabin. 

OPTIONAL  PRAYERS  IN  WEEKLY  DAYS 

SUNDAY:  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  prays  four  rak'ats  on 
Sunday  and  recitesa  in  each  rak'ats  the  opening  chapter  and 
Amaner  Rasul,  innumerable  merits  are  written  for  him  like  the 
number  of  Christian  males  and  females.  The  Prophet  said: 
Proclaim  the  unity  of  God  by  many  prayers  on  Sunday  as  God  is 
one  and  there  is  no  partner  for  him. 


Vol-I  PRAYER  157 

MONDAY:  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  prays  two  rak'ats  in 
the  early  part  of  Monday  reciting  Fateha  once  in  each  rak'at, 
Ayatul  Kursi  once,  Ikhlas  once,  Nas  once,  Falaq  once  and  then 
after  salam  Istigfar  twelve  times  and  Darud  twelve  times,  God 
forgives  all  his  sins.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  prays  12  rak'ats  on 
Monday  and  recites  in  each  rak'at  Sura  Fateha  and  Ayatul  Kursi 
and  when  he  finishes  prayer  recites  Ikhlas  12  times  and  Istigfar 
12  times,  he  will  be  said  on  the  Resurrection  day:  O  son  of  so  and 
so,  rise  up  and  take  rewards  from  God.  The  first  reward  that 
willbe  rewarded  to  him  is  one  thousand  dresses,  one  throne  on 
his  head  and  he  will  be  said:  Enter  Paradise.  One  lac  angels  will 
greet  him  and  each  angel  will  have  one  present  and  they  will 
accompany  him  and  they  will  carry  him  to  one  thousand  palaces 
of  light. 

TUESDAY:  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  prays  ten  rak'ats  in 
the  early  part  of  Tuesday  with  Fateha  and  Ayatul  Qursi  and 
Ikhlas  three  times  in  each  rak'at,  his  faults  will  not  be  written  for 
seventy  days.  If  he  dies  on  the  last  day,  he  dies  a  martyr  and  his 
sins  for  seventy,  years  will  be  forgiven. 

WEDNESDAY:  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  prays  12  rak'ats 
after  rising  on  Wednesday  and  recites  in  each  rak'at  Fateha  and 
Ayatul  Qursi  once  and  Ikhlas  three  times,  Nas  and  Falaq  each 
three  times, 'a  proclaimer  will  proclaim  near  the  Throne,  O 
servant  of  God,  your  actions  have  been  accepted  and  your  future 
sins  forgiven.  Punishment  of  the  Resurrection  day  will  be  lifted 
up  from  you  and  you  will  be  given  the  actions  of  a  Prophet  on 
that day. 

THURSDAY:  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  recites  between  Juhr 
and  Asr  two  rak'ats  with  fateha  and  Ayatul  Qursi  in  the  first 
rak'at  one  hundred  times,  Fateha  and  Ikhlas  in  the  second  rak'at 
one  hundred  times  and  Darud  one  hundred  times,  God  will 
reward  him  with  fasting  of  Rajab,  Shaban  and  Ramzan,the 
rewards  of  one  Haj  and  innumertable  virtues  will  be  written  for 
him. 

FRIDAY:  The  Prophet  said:  There  is  a  prayer  on  the  Jumma 
day.  When  the  sun  rises  up  to  one  bow's  distance  or  more  and  if  a 
believing  man  makes  full  ablution  and  prays  two  rak'ats  with 
faithand  hoping  for  reward,  God  writes  for  him  two  hundred 
virtues  and  effaces  from  him  two  hundred  sins.  If  a  man  prays 


158  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

four  rak'ats,  God  will  open  for  him  in  Paradise  800  doors  and 
forgive  all  his  sins.  If  a  man  prays  12  rakats,  1200  merits  will  be 
written  for  him  and  1200  sins  will  be  effaced  from  him  and  there 
will  be  for  him  1200  doors  in  Paradise.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man 
on  Jumma  day  enters  the  mosque  and  prays  four  rak'ats  after 
Jumma  prayer  with  Fateha  50  times  and  Ikhlas  50  times  in  each 
rak'at,  he  will  not  die  till  he  sees  his  place  in  paradise  or  it  is 
shown  to  him. 

SATURDAY:  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  prays  four  rak'ats 
on  Saturday  with  Fateha  once  and  Ikhlas  three  times  and  then 
Ayatul  Qursi  in  each  rakat,  God  will  write  for  him  for  every  word 
one  Haj  and  one  Umrah  and  one  year's  fasting  and  prayer  for 
each  word  and  he  will  reside  with  the  Prophets  and  martyrs 
under  the  Throne  of  God. 

OPTIONAL  PRAYERS  IN  WEEKLY  NIGHTS 

SUNDAY  NIGHT:  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  prays  20 
rak'ats  in  the  night  of  Sunday  with  Fatiha  and  Ikhlas  50  times, 
Nas  and  Falaq  once  in  each  rak'at  and  recites  Istigfar  one 
hundred  times  and  recites  Istigfar  for  himself  and  his  parents  and 
Darud  one  hundred  times  and  takes  refer  to  God  by  realizing 
himself  from  his  own  strength  and  then  says:  I  bear  witness  that 
there  is  no  deity  but  God  and  I  bear  witness  that  Adam  is  the 
chosen  one  of  God  and  His  natural  creation,  that  Abraham  is  His 
friend,  Moses  is  Kalimulla,  Jesus  is  the  Spirit  of  God  and 
Muhammad  is  the  friend  of  God,  he  will  get  merits  as 
innumerable  as  the  persons  who  made  calumny  against  God 
before  and  who  did  not  make  calumny  and  on  the  Resurrection 
day  he  will  be  raised  along  with  the  believers  and  it  will  be  the 
duty  of  God  to  admit  him  in  Paradise  along  with  the  Prophets. 

MONDAY  NIGHT:  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  prays  4  rakat 
in  the  night  of  Monday  with  Fatiha  and  Ikhlas  ten  times  in  the 
first  rakat,  Fatiha  and  Ikhlas  twenty  times  in  the  second  rak'at, 
Fatiha  and  Ikhlas  thirty  times  in  the  third  rak'at  and  Fatiha  and 
Ikhlas  forty  times  in  the  fourth  rak'at  and  then  returns  salam  and 
afterwards  recites  Ikhlas  75  times  and  seeks  Istigfar  for  himself 
and  his  parents  75  times  and  then  prays  for  his  needs  to  God,  He 
accepts  his  invocation. 

TUESDAY  NIGHT:  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  prays  two 
rak'ats  therein  with  chapters  Fatiha  and  Ikhlas  15  times,  Nas  15 


Vol-I  PRAYER  159 

times,  Falaq  15  times,  Ayatul  Qursi  11  times,  Istigfar  15  times, 
will  get  ample  rewards.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  prays  in 
Tuesday  night  two  rak'ats  with  Fateha  in  each  rak'at  followed  by 
chapter  Ikhlas  seven  times,  God  will  release  him  from  Hell  and  it 
will  be  for  him  on  the  Resurrection  day  guide  and  proof. 

WEDNESDAY  NIGHT:  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  prays  two 
rak'ats  in  Wednesday  night  with  Fatiha  and  Falaq  ten  times  in  the 
first  rak'at  and  Fatiha  and  Nas  ten  times  in  the  second  rak'at  and 
then  after  finishing  it  reads  Istigfar  ten  times  and  then  Darud  ten 
times,  seventy  thous-and  angels  come  down  for  him  from  every 
heaven  and  write  for  him  rewards  upto  the  Resurrection  Day. 

THURSDAY  NIGHT.  The  Prophet  said  :  He  who  prays  two 
rak'ats  between  Magrib  and  Isha  with  Fatiha  and  Ayatul  Qursi 
five  times,  Falaq  five  times,  Nas  five  times  and  after  prayer 
Istigfar  15  times  and  bestows  them  for  his  parents,  obeys  his 
duties  towards  his  parents  although  he  was  disobedient  to  them 
before.  God  gives  him  what  He  gives  to  the  siddiqs  and  martyrs. 

FRIDAY  NIGHT:  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  prays  12  rak'ats 
between  Magrib  and  Isha  with  Fatiha  and  Ikhlas  11  times,  prays 
as  it  were  for  12  years  for  the  nights  and  fasted  for  the  days.The 
prophet  said:  Send  many  Daruds  in  Jumma  day  and  night. 

SATURDAY  NIGHT:  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  prays  12 
rak'ats  between  Magrib  and  Isha,  a  mansion  is  built  for  him  in 
Paradise,  he  gets  rewards  of  charity  to  each  male  and  female,  gets 
release  from  the  Jews  and  it  becomes  the  duty  of  God  to  forgive 
him. 

OPTIONAL  ANNUAL  PRAYERS 

Such,  prayers  are  four  -  (1)  Prayers  of  two  I'ds  or  festivals,  (2) 
Tarawih  prayers,  (3)  Prayer  in  Rajab,  and  (4)  Prayer  in  Shaban. 

(2)  PRAYER  OF  TWO  I'DS:  They  are  Sunnat  Muaqqadah 
and  there  are  several  duties  in  them.  Take  bath  in  the  morning  of 
I'd  day,  take  dresses  and  use  scents.  Go  by  one  way  and  return  by 
another.  The  Prophet  used  to  observe  it.  He  used  to  order  the 
servants,  slaves  and  women  to  come  out  for  prayers  on  these 
days.  It  is  better  to  pray  I'd  prayers  in  open  fields  except  Mecca 
and  Baitul  Muqaddas.  The  time  runs  from  sun-rise  to  sun  decline 
at  noon.  The  time  for  animal  sacrifice  on  Idul  Azha  runs  from 


160  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

after  the  prayer  to  the  end  of  the  13th  day  of  Zilhaj.  I'd  charity  is 
to  be  given  before  prayer. 

The  form  of  prayer  runs  as  follows.  The  Imam  will  pray  two 
rak'ats  with  six  Takbirs  in  addition,  three  in  the  first  rak'at  and 
three  in  the  second.  The  Imam  will  then  deliver  sermon  and  then 
makeMonazat, 

(2)  TARAWITH  PRAYER:  It  consists  of  twenty  rak'ats.  It 
maybe  said  also  in  congregation.  The  Holy  Prophet  sometimes 
prayed  it  alone  and  sometimes  in  congregation.  He  said;  I  fear 
this  prayer  may  be  imposed  on  you  as  a  compulsory  duty.  It  was 
Hazrat  Omar  who  directed  the  Muslims  to  observe  it  in 
congregation.  The  Prophet  said:  As  it  is  more  meritorious  to 
observe  compulsory  prayer  in  mosque  than  in  houses,  so  it  is 
more  meritorious  to  observe  optional  prayers  in  houses  than  in 
mosques.  The  Prophet  said:  The  merits  of  one  rak'at  prayer  in 
this  mosque  of  mine  is  one  thousand  times  greater  than 
observing  it  in  other  mosques  and  the  merits  of  one  rak'at  of 
prayer  in  the  mosque  of  the  Ka'ba  is  better  than  one  thousand 
times  than  observing  it  in  my  mosque.  The  prayer  of  one  who 
prays  in  a  corner  of  his  house  and  knows  nobody  than  God  is 
better  than  all  these  prayers."  It  is  better  however  to  pray 
Tarawih  in  congregation  as  Hazrat  Omar  did  it. 

(3)  PRAYER  IN  RAJAB:  The  Prophet  said:  One  who  fasts  five 
days  in  Rajab,  prays  twelve  rak'ats  between  Magrib  and  Isha 
with  a  unit  of  two  rak'ats  (which  certain  formalities  as 
prescribed),  his  invocation  is  accepted. 

(4)  PRAYER  IN  SHABAN:  It  is  observed  in  the  night  of  the 
15th  Shaban.  There  are  one  hundred  rak'ats  of  prayer  with  a  unit 
of  two  rak'ats.  The  earlier  sages  used  to  observe  this  prayer. 

FOURTH  KIND  OF  OPTIONAL  PRAYERS 

These  prayers  are  connected  with  causes  and  they  are  nine  in 
number  (1)  Prayer  of  solar  and  (2)  lunar  eclipses,  (3)  prayer  for 
rain,  (4)  funeral  prayer  (5)  prayer  for  entering  into  mosque,  (6) 
.  prayer  of  ablution,  (7)  two  rakats  between  Azan  and  Aqamat,.  (8) 
two  rak'ats  at  the  time  of  coming  out  of  house  for  journey  and 
two  rak'ats  at  the  time  of  entry  into  house  after  journey  and  (9) 
prayer  for  seeking  good  called  Istakhara  prayer. 


Vol-I  PRAYER  161 

PRAYER  FOR  SOLAR  AND  LUNAR  ECLIPSE:  The  Prophet 
said:  Solar  and  lunar  eclipses  are  two  signs  out  of  the  signs  of 
God.  They  do  not  occur  for  birth  or  death  of  anybody.  When  you 
see  it,  turn  towards  the  remembrance  of  God  and  prayer.  He  said 
it  when  his  son  Ibrahim  died  and  people  ascribed  it  to  the  above 
cause. 

PRAYER  FOR  RAIN:  The  Prophet  used  to  observe  this 
prayer  coming  out  in  the  open  field  when  there  was  drought  and 
want  of  rain  for  a  continued  long  time.  This  should  be  preceded 
by  fast  for  three  days  and  then  on  the  fourth  day  prayer  be  said  in 
the  open  field  in  congregation  for  rain  with  the  greatest  humility 
of  spirit  and  earnestness  of  mind  and  then  invocation  should  be 
made  in  the  following  manner:  O  God,  Thou  hast  commanded  us 
to  invoke  Thee  and  Thou  hast  promised  us  to  accept  it.  We  have 
indeed  invoked  Thee  as  Thou  hast  commanded  us.  So  accept  our 
invocation  as  Thou  hast  promised  us.  O  God,  shower  blessing  on 
us  with  Thy  forgiveness  and  accept  our  invocation  by  sending  us 
rain  and  giving  us  ample  provision. 

FUNERAL  PRAYER:  This  prayer  is  Farze  Kefaya  or  binding 
on  community  as  a  whole.  It  is  optional  only  for  one  who  is 
exempted  owing  to  the  presence  of  some  members  of  the 
community,  in  the  prayer.  The  Prophet  said:  It  forty  Muslims  who 
do  not  set  up  partnership  with  God  attend  the  funeral  prayer  of  a 
Muslim,  God  accepts  their  intercession  for  him.  Follow  the  bier 
after  prayer  up  to  the  grave  and  recite  the  following  after 
entering  in  the  grave-yard.  Peace  be  on  you,  O  the  inmates  of 
these  house  of  the  believers  and  Muslims.  May  God  show  mercy 
on  those  who  have  gone  before  and  who  have  come  latter.  We 
shall  reach  you  if  God  wills.  Then  standing  by  the  side  of  the 
grave  of  the  person  just  buried,  recite  the  following:  O  God,  Thy 
servant  has  returned  to  Thee.  Be  kind  to  him  and  show  him 
mercy.  O  God,  remove -the  earth  from  his  two  sides  and  open  the 
doors  of  heaven  for  his  soul  and  accept  it  with  good  acceptance. 
O  God,  if  he  is  a  virtuous  man,  increase  his  virtues  manifold  and 
if  he  is  a  sinner,  forgive  him. 

PRAYER  AFTER  ENTRY  INTO  MOSQUE:  It  is  two  rakats 
or  more  and  prayer  after  ablution  is  also  two  rak'ats.  The  Prophet 
said:  I  saw  Bilal  in  Paradise  and  asked  him:  For  what  action  have 
you  entered  Paradise  before  me?  He  said:  I  know  nothing  except 
the  fact  that  I  prayed  two  rak'ats  after  every  ablution. 


162  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  VoH 

At  the  time  of  coming  out  of  the  house  and  entering  it  after 
journey,  pray  two  rak'ats.  The  Prophet  said:  Pray  two  rak'ats 
when  you  go  out  of  your  house  so  that  you  may  be  saved  from  the 
harms  of  going  out.  The  Prophet  said:  When  any  special  work  is 
not  begun  with  the  name  of  God,  it  goes  without  blessing; 

ISTAKHARAH  PRAYER:  This  prayer  is  said  before  an 
action  is  undertaken  to  know  whether  it  will  be  good  or  bad.  It  is 
of  two  rak'ats  with  Chapter  Kaferun  in  the  first  rak'at  ;and 
chapter  Ikhlas  in  the  second  and  at  the  end  with  the  following  . 
invocation:  O  God,  I  wish  to  know  its  good  or  bad  with  the  help 
of  Thy  knowledge  and  I  pray  for  strength  from  Thee  and  I  pray 
for  Thy  abundant  mercy,  as  Thou  knowest  and  I  don't  know  and 
Thou  knowest  the  unseen.  O  God,  if  Thou  knowest  that  this  affair 
will  be  for  my  worldly  or  next  worldly  good  and  for  the  result  of 
my  affairs  sooner  or  latter,  give  strength  to  me,  give  me  blessing 
therein  and  then  make  it  easy  for  me.  If  Thou  knowest  that  this 
affair  of  mine  will  be  bad  for  me  for  my  world,  next  world  and  the 
result  of  my  affairs  sooner  or  latter,  turn  me  from  it  and  it  from 
me.  Thou  art  powerful  over  all  things.  The  Prophet  said:  If  any 
man  among  you  proposes  to  do  a  thing,  let  him  pray  two  rak'ats, 
name  the  project  and  invoke  with  the  above  invocation. 

(8)  PRAYER  FOR  NECESSITY:  If  a  matter  becomes 
necessary  for  his  religion  or  for  his  world,  let  him  pray  twelve 
rak'ats  for  fulfillment  of  his  necessity  with  Ayatul  Qursi  and 
Ikhlas  in  each  rak'at  and  at  the  end  of  the  prayer  of  two  rak'ats,  let 
him  invoke  as  prescribed. 

(9)  PRAYER  FOR  TASBIH:  It  is  also  called  Doa,  Masurah. 
The  Prophet  said  to  Hazrat  Abbas:  Shall  I  not  make  gift  to  you? 
Shall  I  not  show  kindness  on  you?  Shall  I  not  love  you  with  such  a 
thing  which,  if  you  do,  will  be  a  cause  for  God  to  forgive  your 
past  and  future  sins,  old  and  new  sins,  open  and  secret  evils? 
Pray  four  rak'ats  (as  prescribed). 


CHAPTER  V 

ZAKAT 

God  placed  Zakat  next  to  prayer  and  it  is  the  second  pillar  of 
Islam  out  of  five  pillars.  God  says:  Keep  up  prayer  and  pay  Zakat. 
The  Prophet  said:  Islam  is  founded  on  five  pillars  -  (1)  There  is  no 
deity  but  God  and  Muhammad  is  His  servant  and  messenger, 
and  to  bear  witness  to  this  formula,  (2)  to  keep  up  prayers,  (3)  to 
pay  Zakat,  (4)  to  fast  and  (5)  to  make  pilgrimage.  The  punishment 
of  those  who  do  not  pay  Zakat  has  been  mentioned  in  this  verse: 
'Give  good  news  of  grievous  punishment  to  those  who  hoard  up 
gold  and  silver  and  do  not  spend  in  the  way  of  God.'  To  spend 
means  here  to  pay  the  compulsory  duty  of  Zakat.  Ahnaf-b-Qais 
said:  We  were  with  a  party  of  the  Quraish.  Hazrat  Abu  Zarr, 
while  passing  by  that  way  said:  Give  good  news  to  those  who 
hoard  up  wealth  that  such  firm  impressions  will  be  put  on  their 
backs  which  will  come  out  after  piercing  their  sides,  that  such 
firm  impressions  will  be  put  on  their  forehead  that  it  will  come 
out  of  their  forehead. 

Abu  Zarr  said:  I  came  to  the  Prophet  who  was  then  seated  in 
the  shade  of  the  Ka'ba.  He  said  to  me:  By  the  Lord  of  the  Ka'ba, 
they  are  undone.  I  asked:  Who  are  they?  He  said:  Those  who 
increase  their  wealth  and  not  those  who  spend  in  this  way,  in 
their  fronts,  in  their  backs,  in  their  right  sides,  in  their  left  sides, 
but  their  numbers  are  few.  Those  who  have  got  camels,  cattle, 
sheeps  and  goats  and  who  do  not  pay  their  Zakat  will  meet  with 
these  animals  in  huge  forms  on  the  Resurrection  Day.  They  will 
attack  them  with  their  horns  and  will  tread  upon  them  by  their 
hoofs.  If  one  party  go  away,  another  party  will  come.  This  will 
continue  till  the  people  are  brought  for  judgment.  This 
punishment  has  been  described  by  Sahihs  Bakhari  and  Muslim. 
So  the  details  of  Zakat  should  be  learnt. 

SECTION  1 

DIFFERENT  KINDS  OF  ZAKAT 

There  are  six  subject  matters  of  Zakat  -  (1)  Zakat  of  animals, 
(2)  Zakat  of  crops,  (3)  Zakat  of  gold  and  silver,  (4)  Zakat  of  the 
commodities  of  Business.  (5)  Zakat  of  mines  and  (6)  Zakat  of  Idul 
Fitr. 


164  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

(1)  ZAKAT  OF  ANIMALS:  It  is  compulsory  on  a  free  Muslim 
whether  major  or  minor,  sane  or  insane.  There  are  five  conditions 

-  of  Zakat  which  is  obligatory  in  case  of  animals,  (a)  They  are  to  be 
grazed  in  the  grazing  fields,  (b)  They  should  not  be  domestic 
animals,  (c)  They  must  be  in  possession  of  full  one  year,  (d)  One 
must  have  full  ownership  on  them,  (e)  One  must  be  the  owner  of 
Nisab  or  fixed  number  of  these  animals. 

(A)  Among  animals,  Zakat  is  to  be  paid  for  camels,  cattle, 
sheep  and  groats  but  not  for  other  animals  like  horses,  asses, 
mules,  deers  and  young  ones  of  goats.  (B)  There  is*no  Zakat  of 
domestic  animals  which  do  not  graze  purely  in  fields.  (C) 
Animals  must  be  in  possession  of  full  one  year.  The  Prophet  said: 
Zakat  is  not  due  on  any  property  unless  in  possession  of  full  one 
year.  If  any  animal  is  sold  within  one  year,  there  is  no  Zakat  for  it. 
(D)  One  must  have  full  ownership  and  full  power  of  sale  of  the 
animal.  There  is  no  Zakat  of  animals  given  in  pawn  or  mortgage, 
those  which  are  lost  or  snatched  by  force.  It  the  debts  of  a  man  is 
such  that  all  his  properties  are  not  sufficient  to  clear  them,  there 
is  no  Zakat  due  on  him  as  he  is  not  a  solvent  man.  A  solvent  man 
is  one  who  has  got  surplus  wealth  after  necessary  expenses  (E) 
One  must  possess  required  number  of  animals.  The  minimum 
number  of  camels  is  five,  of  cattle  thirty,  of  goats  and  sheep  forty. 
Camels-Zakat  of  one  she  goat  or  he-goat  of  full  two  years  for 
every  five  camels  above  four.  In  case  of  25  camels,  one  she  camel 
or  one  he-  camel  of  full  one  year.  In  case  of  36  camels,  one  she 
camel  of  2  years,  of  46  camels  one  she-camel  of  three  years  and  so 
on.  Cattle.  In  case  of  30  cattle,  one  calf  of  one  year,  of  40  cattle  one 
calf  of  two  years,  of  60  cattle  two  calves  of  one  year.  Sheep  and 
goats.  In  case  of  40  sheep  or  goats,  one  she  goat  of  one  year,  of 
120,  two  she  goats  and  so  on. 

(2)  ZAKAT  OF  CROPS:  If  anybody  has  got  twenty  maunds 
of  rice,  wheat,  maize,  pulse,  dates  or  such  food  stuffs  by  which  a 
man  can  maintain  his  livelihood,  Zakat  of  one  tenth  of  the  crop  is 
compulsory  on  him.  No  Zakat  is  due  for  less  than  20  maunds. 
There  is  no  Zakat  on  fruits  and  cotton.  If  fields  are  watered  by 
artificial  means  by  taking  water  from  canals,  tanks,  drains,  then 
one  twentieth  is  due  on  crops. 

(3)  ZAKAT  OF  GOLD  AND  SILVER:  Zakat  of  Silver  is  one 
fortieth  of  pure  silver  if  not  less  than  52  1/2  tolas  and  gold  and 
less  than  7  1/2  tolas.  This  is  the  nisab  fixed  for  which  Zakat  is 


Vol-I  ZAKAT  165 

due.  This  proportion  will  continue  in  case  of  the  value  of  gold 
and  silver  or  of  things  made  of  them  if  they  are  in  possession  for 
full  one  year.  For  ornaments  of  gold  and  silver  which  are  for  use, 
there  is  no  Zakat  according  to  Imam  Abu  Hanifa.  Zakat  is  due  on 
money  on  loan  after  the  loan  is  paid. 

(4)  ZAKAT  ON  MERCHANDISE:  Zakat  on  merchandise  is 
like  that  of  gold  and  silver.  One  year  should  have  elapsed  from 
the  date  of  their  purchase  and  if  it  reaches  nisab.  This  applies  also 
in  case  of  exchange  of  goods.  Zakat  is  also  payable  on  profits  of 
commodities  along  with  the  commodities  at  the  end  of  a  year. 

(5)  ZAKAT  ON  MINES  AND  BURIED  TREASURERS:  If 

gold  and  silver  of  the  non  Muslims  are  found  buried,  Zakat  is 
soon  due  at  the  rate  of  one  fifth.  There  is  no  condition  of 
possession  of  one  year  or  of  nisab.  This  is  just  like  booty  gained  in 
war.  There  is  no  Zakat  of  the  things  taken  from  mines  except  gold 
and  silver.  Their  Zakat  is  of  one  fortieth  after  clearance  and  after 
it  reaches  Nisab  and  completion  of  possession  of  one  year. 

(6)  ZAKAT  OF  ID'UL  FITR:  This  charity  is  compulsory  on 
every  Muslim  who  has  got  food  in  excess  of  one  day  and  one 
night  of  I'd  at  be  rate  of  2  1  /2  seers  of  principal  food  stuffs  or  one 
sa'a  per  head.  This  is  payable  on  behalf  of  all  the  members  of  the 
family  and  near  relatives  and  parents  who  are  maintained  by 
him.  The  Prophet  said:  Give  the  charity  of  Fitr  of  all  the  persons 
you  maintain. 

SECTION  2 

PAYMENT  OF  ZAKAT  AND  ITS  CONDITIONS 

Zakat  is  to  be  paid  having  a  look  to  the  following  five  things. 
(1)  Intend  to  pay  Zakat  at  the  time  when  it  falls  due  and  fix 
properties  and  things  for  payment  of  Zakat.  The  guardian  of  a 
minor  or  an  insane  man  shall  pay  Zakat  on  his  behalf.  The  ruler  or 
his  officers  can  collect  Zakat  (2)  At  the  completion  of  one  year. 
Zakat  falls  due  and  it  should  be  paid  without  delay.  Fitr  charity  is 
payable  on  the  day  of  I'd  before  I'd  prayer.  If  a  man  makes  delay 
in  payment  of  Zakat,  he  disobeys  God.  If  he  loses  his  property 
after  it  is  due,  the  responsibility  does  not  cease.  Zakat  of  two 
years  can  be  paid  in  advance.  (3)  One  should  not  pay  Zakat  on 
valuation  of  properties.  Zakat  should  be  paid  with  the  thing  for 
which  Zakat  is  due.  For  instance,  silver  should  not  be  paid  for 


166  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

gold  and  gold  for  silver.  The  above  is  the  opinion  of  Imam 
Shafeyi  and  not  of  Imam  Abu  Hanifa  according  to  whom  it  is 
lawful.  (4)  It  is  better  to  pay  Zakat  to  the  people  where  the  Zakat 
payer  resides  permanently  as  the  poor  and  the  destitute  of  that 
place  look  to  him  for  help.  (5)  Zakat  is  to  be  paid  to  eight  classes 
of  persons  as  described  in  the  Quran  and  will  be  discussed  in 
section  3. 

SOME  SUBTLE  RULES  OF  ZAKAT 

There  are  some  subtle  points  for  a  payer  of  Zakat  and  for  one 
who  travels  in  the  path  of  the  next  world. 

(1)  THE  MEANING  AND  OBJECT  OF  ZAKAT:  Zakat  is  the 
purification  of  properties.  There  are  three  reasons  for  its  being  a 
pillar  of  Islam,  (a)  The  first  reason  is  to  appreciate  the  two  words 
of  Kalema  Shahadat,  to  take  Tauhid  firmly  and  to  witness  the 
unity  of  God.  Promise  reaches  perfection  when  a  unitarian  has 
got  no  object  of  love  except  One,  as  love  does  not  admit  a  partner. 
There  is  little  benefit  in  uttering  Kalima  Shahahdat  by  tongue 
only  and  the  trial  is  in  giving  up  of  other  objects  of  love  except 
God.  To  the  people,  wealth  and  properties  are  objects  of  love  as 
they  are  the  instruments  of  earthly  pleasures  and  getting  love 
from  others.  Those  who  claim  the  love  of  God  are  tried  and  their 
objects  of  love  are  snatched  away  from  them.  For  this  reason  God 
says:  God  purchased  from  the  believers  their  lives  and  properties 
in  exchange  of  paradise  for  them.  This  was  said  with  regard  to 
Jihad.  Sacrifice  of  properties  is  easier  than  sacrifice  of  life  which 
has  been  also  mentioned  here  to  gain  the  love  of  God.  From  this 
angle  of  view,  men  can  be  divided  in  to  three  classes. 

(1)  The  first  class  of  men  recognise  Tauhid  as  true,  fulfill  their 
promise  and  spend  their  properties  in  the  way  of  God.  They  do 
not  hoard  wealth.  They  do  not  deny  that  Zakat  is  not  compulsory 
on  them.  Rather  they  say:  For  us,  it  is  compulsory  to  spend  all  our 
properties.  For  this  reason,  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  brought  all  his 
properties  to  the  Prophet  when  he  called  for  charities  in  the  way 
of  God.  Hazrat  Omar  brought  half  of  his  property.  The  Prophet 
said  to  Hazrat  Omar:  What  have  you  left  for  your  family?  He 
said:  Half  of  my  wealth.  He  asked  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr:  What  have 
you  left  for  your  family?  He  said:  God  and  His  Prophet.  The 
Prophet  said:  The  difference  between  you  is  in  your  replied. 


Vol-I  ZAKAT  167 

(2)  The  second  class  of  men  are  lower  in  rank.  They  spend 
their  wealth  at  the  time  of  necessity.  The  object  is  hoarding  is  not 
to  enjoy  pleasure  but  to  spend  in  proportion  to  necessity  and  to 
spend  their  excess  wealth  in  good  deeds.  They  don't  reduce  the 
amount  of  Zakat.  Many  Tabeyins  like  Nakhyi,  Shubi,  Ata  and 
others  held  that  there  are  additional  duties  on  wealth  besides 
Zakat.  The  sage  Shubi  was  asked:  Is  there  any  additional  duty  on 
wealth  besides  Zakat?  He  said:  Yes,  did  you  not  hear  the  verse  of 
God:  Being  prompted  by  divine  love  they  spend  wealth  for  their 
near  relatives,  orphans,  the  poor  and  the  travellers.  This  is 
supported  by  the  following  verse:  They  spend  out  of  what  I  have 
provided  them  with.  God  says:  Spend  out  of  what  I  have 
provided  you.  This  means  that  whenever  you  will  find  a  man  in 
want,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  rich  to  remove  his  want.  This  is  an 
additional  charity  besides  Zakat.  The  correct  opinion  according 
to  theology  is  that  whenever  expense  is  necessary,  to  spend  is 
Farze  Kefayah  as  it  is  not  legal  to  cause  harm  to  the  Muslims. 

(3)  The  third  class  are  those  persons  who  rest  contended  by 
payment  of  only  Zakat.  They  do  not  pay  more  or  less.  This  is  the 
lowest  rank  and  the  general  people  adopt  this  course  as  they  are 
naturally  miser,  attached  to  riches  and  their  love  for  the  next 
world  is  weak.  God  Says:  'If  they  beg  of  you  and  press  for  it,  you 
become  miser.'  There  is  a  wide  gulf  of  difference  between  those 
who  sacrifice  their  lives  and  properties  for  God  and  those  who 
are  defamed  for  miserliness. 

(2)  The  second  cause  is  to  be  pure  from  miserliness  as  it  is  one 
of  the  cause  of  destruction.  The  Prophet  said:  There  are  three 
destructive  guilts-to  obey  miserliness,  to  follow  low  desires  and 
self-conceit.  God  says:  Those  who  are  saved  from  miserliness 
have  got  salvation.  In  this  way,  Zakat  is  the  cause  of  purification 
of  properties. 

(3)  The  third  cause  is  to  express  gratefulness  for  the  gifts  of 
God  as  God's  gifts  on  His  servants  are  unbounded.  The 
gratefulness  for  the  gifts  of  body  by  doing  divine  services  and  the 
gratefulness  for  the  gifts  of  wealth  by  expense  of  wealth  are 
expressed.  How  unfortunate  is  he  who  sees  no  means  of 
livelihood  of  a  poor  man  and  till  does  not  give  him  charity  inspite 
of  his  begging  and  who  rather  expresses  gratefulness  that  God 
saved  him  from  wants. 


168  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

(2)  Second  subtle  point:  It  is  to  look  to  the  times  and  the  rules 
of  payment  of  Zakat.  The  religious  men  pay  Zakat  before  it 
becomes  compulsory.  They  transcend  the  limit  of  time.  There  is 
chance  of  falling  into  sin  if  Zakat  is  paid  late  and  not  in  time. 
Willingness  to  do  good  deed  comes  from  angels  and  it  should  be 
considered  a  cause  of  fortune.  The  heart  of  a  believer  is  within  the 
two  fingers  of  the  Merciful  and  there  is  no  delay  in  its  change. 
The  devil  enjoins  on  doing  evil  deeds  and  shows  fear  of  poverty. 
Zakat  should  be  paid  in  the  month  of  Muharram,  the  first  month 
of  Hijra  and  one  of  the  pure  months  or  it  should  be  paid  in  the 
month  Ramzan  as  the  Prophet  paid  most  of  his  charities  in  this 
month  and  there  is  the  excellence  of  the  Blessed  night  in  this 
month  and  in  the  month  of  pilgrimage.  The  last  ten  days  of 
Ramzan  month  and  the  first  ten  days  of  the  month  of  Zilhaj  are 
days  of  excellences. 

(3)  Third  subtle  point:  It  is  to  pay  Zakat  in  secret.  It 
removes  show  and  greed  for  fame.  The  Prophet  said:  The  best 
charity  is  in  secret  charity  of  a  poor  man  to  a  man  in  want.  A 
certain  learned  man  said:  There  are  three  matters  in  the  s'ecret 
wealth  of  good  works,  one  of  them  is  secret  charity.  The  Prophet 
said:  If  a  man  acts  secretly,  God  writes  it  secretly  as  secrecy  is  not 
maintained  if  it  is  disclosed.  There  a  well-known  Hadis  about 
show  in  open  charity.  The  Prophet  said:  God  will  give  shade  to 
seven  persons  on  the  day  when  there  will  be  no  shade  except  the 
shade  of  God,  one  who  gives  charity  in  such  a  manner  that  his 
left  hand  does  not  know  what  his  right  hand  has  given  in 
charity.  There  is  in  another  Hadis:  Secret  charity  appeases  the 
wrath  of  God.  God  says:  And  if  you  give  charity  sincerely,  it  is 
also  better  for  you.  In  secret  charity,  one  can  be  safe  from  the 
danger  of  show.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  wants  fame  by 
incurring  the  pleasure  of  men,  or  rebukes  after  charity,  or 
discloses  his  charity  and  thereby  seeks  name  and  fame  and  or 
gives  charity  among  the  people  for  show,  God  will  not  accept  his 
charity.  A  secret  charity  is  free  from  the  above  faults.  Many 
learned  men  said  that  the  giver  should  not  even  know  the 
person  who  takes  charity.  Some  of  them  handed  it  over  to  the 
blind. 

(4)  Fourth  subtle  point:  It  is  good  to  give  charity  openly  in  a 
place  where  the  people  are  encouraged  to  give  charity  by  seeing 
it.  God  says:  Spend  what  I  have  given  you  secretly  and  openly. 


Vol-I  ZAKAT  169 

Care  should  be  taken  in  open  charity  about  show,  rebuke  after 
charity  and  not  to  break  the  secrets  of  a  poor  man  as  most  of  the 
beggars  do  not  wish  that  anybody  should  see  them  as  beggars. 

(5)  Fifth  subtle  point:  It  is  not  to  destroy  charity  by  rebuke 
and  giving  trouble  after  charity.  God  says:  Don't  make  your 
charity  void  by  'Mann'  that  is  giving  trouble.  There  are 
differences  of  opinion  for  the  meaning  of  Mann.  Some  say  that  its 
meaning  is  to  remind  charity  to  the  receiver  and  that  'Aza'  means 
to  disclose  it.  Sufiyan  was  asked:  What  is  Mann?  He  replied:  To 
remind  it  repeatedly  and  to  discuss  about  it.  Some  say  that  its 
meaning  is  to  take  boast  for  giving  him  charity  and  'Aza'  means 
to  drive  him  away  and  to  rebuke  him  by  words.  The  Prophet  said: 
God  does  not  accept  the  charity  of  one  who  does  'Mann'.  Gazzali 
explains  it  thus.  Mann  has  got  roof  and  branches  and  it  is 
expressed  in  tongue  and  limbs.  The  roof  of  'Mann'  is  to  think 
oneself  as  the  benefactor  of  one  who  receives  charity.  Rather  the 
receiver  should  consider  that  he  has  shown  kindness  to  the  giver 
by  accepting  his  charity,  because  he  purifies  the  giver  and  gives 
him  release  from  Hell  fire.  The  charity  of  the  giver  is  to  request 
the  receiver.  The  Prophet  said:  Charity  falls  on  the  hand  of  God 
before  it  falls  in  the  hand  of  a  beggar.  Now  it  appears  that  the 
giver  places  his  charity  first  to  God  and  then  the  beggar  receives 
it  from  God.  'Mann'  comes  in  when  the  giver  understands  that  he 
has  done  some  benefit  to  the  receiver  of  charity.  So  the  meaning 
of  'Mann'  is  to  discuss  about  charity,  to  disclose  it  and  to  hope  to 
get  from  the  receiver  gratefulness,  prayer,  service,  honour  and  to 
wish  that  he  should  be  followed  in  his  actions.  These  are  the 
secret  meanings  of  'Mann'. 

'Aza'  means  to  rebuke,  to  use  harsh  word  and  to  humiliate 
the  receiver  of  charity.  Its  secret  meaning  is  unwillingness  to 
withdraw  hand  from  wealth,  to  think  to  give  charity  as 
troublesome.  Secondly,  it  means  that  the  giver  thinks  himself 
superior  to  the  receiver  and  thinks  him  inferior  for  his  wants. 
Unwillingness  to  give  charity  is  sign  of  foolishness,  because  who 
is  more  foolish  than  one  who  is  reluctant  to  spend  one  dirham  in 
lieu  of  one  thousand  dirhams  in  the  next  world?  It  appears  from 
this  that  the  object  of  charity  and  expense  is  to  get  the  pleasure  of 
God  and  to  get  merits  in  the  next  world.  The  pious  men  among 
the  rich  will  go  to  Paradise  five  hundred  years  after  the  pious 
poor  men.  For  this  reason,  the  Prophet  said:  By  the  Lord  of  the 


170  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

Ka'ba,  they  are  undone.  Abu  Zarr  asked:  Who  are  undone?  He 
said:  Those  who  have  got  much  wealth.'  Then  how  can  the  poor 
be  held  in  contempt? 

God  keeps  the  rich  only  for  the  poor,  because  the  poor  earn 
their  livelihood  by  their  industry,  increase  their  provisions  and 
preserve  them  with  difficulties.  The  rich  give  charity  according 
to  the  requirements  of  the  poor  and  guard  the  excess  wealth.  So 
think  that  the  rich  are  servants  for  the  livelihood  of  the  poor. 
These  are  the  conditions  of  charity  and  Zakat.  This  is  like  God 
fear  in  prayer.  The  following  Hadis  establishes  it.  The  Prophet 
said:  There  is  no  prayer  for  a  man  except  what  he  understands 
therefrom.  He  said:  God  does  not  accept  the  charity  of  one  who 
gives  trouble  to  the  receiver.  God  says:  Don't  make  your  charity 
void  by  mentioning  it  and  by  giving  trouble. 

(6)  Sixth  subtle  point:  Think  charity  as  little,  because  if  it  is 
considered  great,  it  grows  self-praise  which  destroys  an  action. 
God  says:  When  your  great  number  pleased  you,  it  came  of  no 
use  to  you.'  Some  say  that  when  one  considers  a  religious  action 
little,  itbecomes  great  to  God,  and  when  a  sin  is  considered  great, 
it  becomes  little  to  God.  Some  say  that  any  good  deed. does  not 
become  perfect  without  three  things  to  think  it  little,  to  do  it  soon 
and  to  keep  it  secret.  If  a  man  spends  money  in  the  construction 
of  a  mosque,  it  is  possible  for  him  to  think  it  great,  but  there  is  no 
'Mann'  or  'Aza'  in  it.  It  may  be  called  self-pleasure  or  self-praise. 
Its  medicine  is  a  mixture  of  knowledge  and  action.  Knowledge 
comes  in  the  fact  that  he  will  not  get  the  highest  rank  as  he  has  not 
gifted  his  entire  wealth  in  charity  and  so  he  should  be  ashamed, 
for  this  wealth  belongs  to  God  and  He  gives  it  to  whomsoever  He 
pleases  along  with  Taufiq  to  spend  it  in  charity.  Regarding 
action,  charity  should  be  given  after  being  ashamed  as  you  were 
miser  is  not  giving  the  entire  property  given  to  you  by  God. 

(7)  Seventh  subtle  point:  Give  in  charity  that  is  best,  punand 
the  most  lawful  thing  as  God  is  pure  and  does  not  accept  but  pure 
wealth.  The  Prophet  said:  'Good  news  to  the  man  who  earns 
wealth  without  committing  sin  and  spends  therefrom.'  If  he  does 
not  spend  out  of  his  best  properties,  it  is  impertinent  on  his  part 
as  he  reserved  the  best  thing  for  his  family  members  and  loved 
the  worst  thing  for  God.  If  he  gives  bad  things  to  his  guest  for 
eating,  he  becomes  surely  displeased  with  him.  A  wise  man 
should  not  place  others  above  himself.  He  will  leave  no  property 


Vol-I  ZAKAT  171 

except  what  he  gives  in  charity.  What  he  eats  finishes  and  what 
he  enjoys  of  his  property  becomes  a  past  thing.  God  says:  'O 
those  who  believe,  spend  of  the  good  things  you  earn  and  what  I 
grow  for  you  out  of  the  earth  and  don't  intend  therefrom,  impure 
things.'  Don't  take  it  without  dislike  and  shame.  So  don't  love  to 
give  to  God  impure  and  bad  things.  There  is  in  Hadis:  One 
dirham  gains  over  one  lac  dirhams.  Its  cause  is  that  a  man  gives 
one  dirham  in  charity  with  pleasure  of  mind  after  taking  it  out 
from  mostly  his  lawful  earnings  and  another  man  gives  charity  of 
one  lac  dirhams  from  his  unlawful  earnings.  God  says:  They  keep 
for  God  what  they  do  not  like.  Their  tongue  spread  this  falsehood 
and  that  this  is  good  for  them.  There  is  no  doubt  that  there  is  Hell 
fire  for  them. 

(8)  Eighth  subtle  point:  Search  for  Zakat  such  man  that  if 
he  is  paid  Zakat,  it  becomes  pure.  The  eight  classes  of  men 
have  been  mentioned  in  the  Quran  for  Zakat.  It  should  be  paid 
to  those  of  them  who  have  got  these  six  qualities.  (1)  God  fear: 
Seek  such  God-fearing  men  who  have  renunciated  the  world 
and  adopted  the  business  of  the  next  world.  The  Prophet  said: 
'Don't  eat  the  food  of  anybody  except  that  of  the  God-fearing 
men  and  do  not  feed  anybody  except  the  God  learning  men. 
The  reason  is  that  such  men  help  religion.  The  Prophet  said: 
Give  your  food  to  the  God-  fearing  people  and  show  kindness 
to  the  believers.  In  other  words,  entertain  one  with  your  food 
whom  you  love  for  the  sake  of  God.  Some  learned  men  did  not 
give  food  except  to  the  poor  people  of  'Suffa'.  They  were 
asked:  It  would  have  been  better  if  your  charity  would  have 
been  given  to  all  poor  men'.  They  said:  No,  the  thoughts  of 
these  people  are  about  only  for  God.  When  they  are  hungry, 
sensation  is  generated  in  their  hearts,.  Once  a  pious  man  was 
about  to  give  up  his  business  and  he  was  going  to  be  a  pauper. 
Hazrat  Juaid  came  to  know  of  it  and  gave  him  some  capital  and 
said:  Use  it  as  your  capital  and  don't  give  up  your  business  as 
it  is  not  an  unprofitable  concern  for  a  man  like  you.  The  man 
used  to  carry  on  the  business  of  vegetables  and  did  not  take 
price  when  he  sold  them  to  the  poor. 

(2)  The  second  quality  is  education  as  it  helps  knowledge. 
The  most  honourable  divine  service  is  to  remain  busy  in  the 
acquisition  of  learning  with  a  good  and  sincere  intention.  The 
sage  Ibnul  Mobarak  used  to  show  kindness  to  the  learned.  He 


172  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

was  asked:  It  would  have  been  better  if  you  have  given  charity  to 
all.  He  said:  I  don't  know  whether  after  prophethood  the  rank  of 
any  man  other  than  that  the  learned  is  superior. 

(3)  The  third  quality  is  truthfulness.  Give  charity  to  such  a 
person  who  is  truthful  and  sincere  and  has  got  knowledge  of 
God-fear  and  Tauhid.  His  Tauhid  is  this  that  when  he  accepts 
charity  he  praises  God,  expresses  gratefulness  and  understands 
that  all  the  gifts  come  from  God  and  not  from  any  intermediary. 
Loqman  advised  his  son:  Between  you  and  God,  don't  consider 
anybody  as  the  giveT  of  gifts  and  the  gifts  of  another  on  you  as 
loan.  He  who  expresses  gratefulness  to  others  except  to  God  has 
not  recognised  his  benefactor  and  all  the  people  are  powerless 
except  through  His  help.  Had  not  God  compelled  the  giver,  he 
would  not  have  given  charity  and  God  intilled  into  his  mind  that 
the  well-being  of  his  temporal  and  spiritual  world  lies  in  his  charity. 
'  When  this  belief  becomes  strong,  his  will  becomes  strong. 

It  is  said  that  the  Prophet  sent  a  man  with  charity  to  be 
given  to  a  poor  man  and  he  said:  Remember  what  he  says:  The 
poor  man  accepted  it  and  said:  Praise  be  to  God  who  does  not 
forget  one  who  remembers  Him  and  does  not  destroy  one  who 
expreses  gratefulness  to  Him.  Then  he  said:  O  God,  you  have 
not  forgotten  the  man  (himself)  and  don't  allow  him  to  forget 
you.  The  man  informed  the  Prophet  of  his  invocation  and  he 
said  being  satisfied:  I  know  that  he  would  say  this.  The 
Prophet  said  to  a  man:  Make  repentance.  He  said:  I  repent  to 
God  .without  a  partner  and  not  to  Muhammad.  The  Prophet 
said:  He  has  recongnised  the  right  of  One  to  whom  it  is  due. 
When  the  verse  dealing  with  the  purity  of  Hazrat  Ayesha  was 
revealed,  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  said:  O  Ayesha,  kiss  the  head  of  the 
Prophet,  Hazrat  Ayesha  said:  By  God,  I  shall  not  do  it  and  I 
shall  not  praise  God  also  for  this.  The  Prophet  said:  O  Abu 
Bakr,  give  up  Ayesha.  In  another  anarration,  Hazrat  Ayesha 
said  to  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr:  Praise  be  to  God  and  not  for  you  and 
not  for  your  friend.  The  Prophet  did  not  deny  it  though  the 
verse  declaring  the  purity  of  Ayesha  was  revealed  to  the 
Prophet.  It  is  the  fault  of  the  unbelievers  to  see  other  things 
besides  God.  God  says:  When  God  is  remembered,  the  hearts 
of  those  who  have  not  brought  faith  in  the  next  world  become 
sad.  He  who  does  not  purify  his  heart  from  the  idea  of  an 
intermediary  is  not  free  from  secret  shirk. 


Vol-I  ZAKAT  173 

(4)  The  fourth  quality  is  to  conceal  wants.  Zakat  and  charity 
should  be  paid  to  those  who  try  to  conceal  their  wants  from  the 
eyes  of  men  and  do  not  complain  of  their  wants.  They  are 
honourable  men.  The  Prophets  have  gone  away  but  their  honour 
remains.  They  used  to  live  in  comfort.  God  says  regarding  these 
people:  The  fools  think  that  they  are  not  in  want  on  account  of 
their  refraining  from  begging.  You  will  know  them  by  their  signs. 
They  do  not  press  the  people  for  begging.'  Seek  such  people  in 
every  locality  and  give  them  charity. 

The  fifth  quality  is  to  have  a  big  family  with  no  earning. 
Give  charity  to  such  a  person  who  has  got  a  big  family  or  who 
is  diseased,  or  is  confined  to  the  corner  of  his  house  on  account 
of  any  other  reason.  God  says  with  regard  to  these  people. 
'Those  poor  men  who  are  confined  in  the  way  of  God  and 
cannot  move  in  the  world.'  In  other  words,  they  are  confined 
in  the  way  of  God  for  members  of  his  family  or  for  scanty 
means  or  for  correction  of  soul  or  those  who  cannot  roam  on 
account  of  their  defects  in  hands  and  feet  are  entitled  to  receive 
charity.  The  Prophet  used  to  give  charity  according  to  the 
number  of  the  members  of  a  family. 

(6)  Another  quality  is  near  relationship,  as  charity  to  a  near 
relative  brings  reward  of  keeping  the  tie  of  blood  connection  or 
relationship.  Hazrat  AH  said:  To  give  one  dirham  to  my  brother  is 
dearer  to  me  than  to  give  twenty  dirhams  to  a  stranger.  To  give 
him  twenty  dirhams  in  charity  and  to  keep  blood  connection 
with  him  is  dearer  to  me  than  the  charity  of  200  dirhams  to  a 
stranger.  To  give  him  one  hundred  dirhams  is  dearer  to  me  than 
to  set  free  a  slave. 

The  abvoe  are  the  qualities  which  should  be  sought  in  giving 
charity  to  a  person.  It  will  increase  reward. 

SECTIONS 
FITNESS  FOR  RECEIVING  ZAKAT 

Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  there  is  no  Zakat  for  anybody 
except  a  Muslim  who  must  not  belong  to  the  Hashemite  dynasty. 
Out  of  eight  qualities,  one  quality  is  necessary  for  a  receiver  of 
Zakat.  It  cannot  be  paid  to  an  unbeliever,  slave,  Hashemite,  boy 
or  an  insane  man  except  though  his  represenatative.  The 


- 1 74  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

descriptions  of  the  eight  classes  of  people  who  can  receive  Zakat 
are  given  below. 

(1 )  THE  POOR:  A  poor  man  is  one  who  has  got  no  wealth  and 
properties  and  who  has  got  no  ability  to  earn.  If  he  has  got  one 
day's  food  and  wearing  cloth,  he  is  not  a  poor  man  but  a  miskin 
or  destitute.  A  poor  man  does  not  go  out  of  poverty  if  he  has  got 
habit  of  begging  as  begging  is  not  a  source  of  li  velihood.  If  he  has 
got  power  and  strength  to  earn  his  livelihood,  he  goes  out  of 
poverty.  If  he  is  a  technician  but  has  got  no  instrument  or  money 
to  purchase  it,  he  can  be  helped  with  Zakat.  The  Prophet  said:  To 
seek  lawful  earning  is  compulsory  after  compulsory  duties. 
There  is  mention  in  it  of  earning  livelihood  by  industry  and 
trouble.  Hazrat  Omar  said:  A  doubtful  earning  is  better  than 
begging.  If  a  man  is  maintained  by  his  parents,  he  cannot  be 
called  poor. 

(2)  MISKIN  OR  DESTITUTE:  A  man  is  called  Miskin  or 
destitute  whose  expense  is  greater  than  his  income.  He  may  be 
owner  of  one  thousand  dirhams,  but  still  he  is  a  destitute  under 
the  above  circumstances. 

(3)  COLLECTORS  OF  ZAKAT.  Out  of  the  earnings  of  Zakat, 
collectors  of  Zakat  may  be  paid.  Writer,  one  who  takes  measure 
and  one  who  copies  registers  are  included  within  these  staffs. 
They  cannot  be  paid  in  excess  of  their  requirements. 

(4)  THOSE  WHO  ARE  INCLINED  TO  ISLAM.  They  are 
non-Muslim  leaders  whose  hearts  are  inclined  to  the  religion  of 
Islam.  The  people  follow  them  and  therefore  if  they  are  inlcined 
to  Islam,  there  is  possibility  of  their  coming  to  Islam. 

(5)  SLAVES  BY  AGREEMENT:  There  may  be  agreement 
between  a  master  and  a  slave  that  if  the  slave  can  pay  a  certain 
sum  to  the  master,  he  can  get  freedom.  This  money  can  legally  be 
paid  out  of  Zakat  fund. 

(6)  DEBTORS.  Zakat  may  be  paid  to  clear  off  debts  of  a 
person  who  has  got  no  means  or  clear  them  or  who  has  property 
which  is  not  sufficient  to  clear  them.  If  a  man  runs  into  debts  for 
having  committed  sinful  acts,  Zakat  cannot  be  paid  to  him  unless 
he  repents. 


Vol-I  ZAKAT  175 

(7)  WARS  IN  THE  WAY  OF  GOD.  Those  soldiers  who  get  no 
salary  from  the  state  Treasury  are  entitled  to  get  Zakat  even  if 
they  are  rich. 

(8)  TRAVELLERS.  One  who  goes  abroad  with  good 
intention  from  his  country  may  get  Zakat  if  he  requires  money 
for  his  travels.  No  proof  of  these  wants  is  necessary.  They  may  be 
relied  on  their  verbal  words. 

DUTIES  OF  ZAKAT  RECEIVER:  A  Zakat  receiver  should 
look  to  five  matters.  (1)  He  should  know  that  God  made  Zakat 
compulsory  so  that  his  thought  is  concentrated  in  one  object  God 
says:  I  created  Jinn  and  man  with  no  other  object  except  that  they 
shquld  worship  Me.  So  divine  service  should  be  the  centre  of 
thought  of  men.  He  gives  wealth  to  men  that  it  may  remove  their 
wants  and  they  may  get  opportunity  of  doing  divine  service.  If 
God  loves  a  man  among  the  rich,  He  saves  him  from  the  world  as 
a  physician  saves  his  patient.  The  poor  man  should  know  that 
Zakat  is  a  gift  from  God  to  him  realised  from  the  rich,  so  that  he 
may  find  time  for  divine  service.  (2)  Be  grateful  to  the  Zakat 
payer,  pray  for  him  and  praise  him.  The  rich  man  should  not  feel 
satisfied  as  he  is  only  an  intermediary  to  help  the  poor  with  the 
gift  of  God.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  is  not  grateful  to  men  is  not 
grateful  to  God'.  God  Himself  praised  men  for  his  good  actions 
though  He  is  the  creator  of  actions  and  deeds.  He  said:  How  good 
is  the  servant,  he  is  turning  to  God  -  38  :  30Q.  Zakat  receiver 
should  invoke  for  the  payer  'thus:  May  God  purify  your  heart 
and  include  you  among  the  pious.  May  He  purify  your  actions 
like  the  actions  ut  the  good  and  may  He  include  your  soul  among 
the  souls  of  the  martyrs.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  does  good  to 
you,  do  good  to  him.  If  you  cannot  do  it,  pray  for  him  so  that  he 
may  understand  that  you  have  done  him  return  good.  It  is  the 
duty  of  the  giver  to  think  charity  as  little  and  the  duty  of  the 
receiver  to  think  it  great.  (3)  Don't  accept  charity  if  it  is  not  from 
lawful  wealth.  God  says:  If  a  man  fears  God,  He  will  find  out  a 
way  for  him  and  provide  him  from  a  source  which  is  beyond  his 
conception.  (4)  Give  up  the  charity  from  earnings  of  doubtful 
nature  and  take  up  to  your  necessity.  Don't  take  it  until  you  know 
for  certain  whether  you  can  legally  accept  it  or  not.  If  you  are  a 
Zakat  collector,  do  not  accept  in  excess  of  your  remuneration.  If 
you  are  a  traveller,  don't  accept  in  excess  of  what  is  necessary  for 
your  journey.  If  you  are  a  needy  man,  you  may  accept  what  is 


176  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

sufficient  for  your  provision  for  a  year  at  most.  This  is  the  last 
limit.  The  Prophet  sometimes  stored  up  provisions  for  his  family 
members  for  a  year,  If  it  is  for  one  day,  it  is  near  God  fear,  until  he. 
possess  nisab,  he  may  accept  it.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  begs 
inspite  of  his  being  rich  will  appear  on  the  Resurrection  Day  with 
his  face  with  scratches  and  wounds.  He  was  asked:  what  is  the 
limit  of  a  rich  man?  He  said:  50  dishrams  or  gold  of  equivalent 
value.  It  is  equivalent  to  a  provision  for  one  year. 

SECTION  4 

OPTIONAL  CHARITY  AND  ITS  EXCELLENCE 

The  Prophet  said:  'Give  charity  of  even  a  date  as  it  appeases 
anger  and  wipes  out  sins  just  as  water  extinguishes  fire?  He  said: 
Save  yourself  from  Hell-fire  even  by  giving  in  charity  half  a  date, 
if  you  cannot  do  it,  even  by  uttering  a  good  word.  The  Prophet 
said:  If  a  Muslim  gives  charity  from  his  lawful  earning  (God  does 
not  accept  but  lawful  thing),  God  accepts  it  with  His  right  hand 
and  maintains  it.  God  maintains  it  till  it  rises  up  to  the  mountain 
Uhud  just  as  one  of  you  raises  up  his  child.  The  Prophet  said  to 
Abu  Darda's:  When  you  cook  curry,  increase  its  soup  and  present 
something  of  it  justly  to  your  neighbour  having  a  look  to  his 
family  members.  The  Prophets  said:  If  a  man  gives  charity  in  a 
good  manner,  God  gives  blessing  in  the  property  left  by  him.  He 
said:  Each  man  will  remain  under  the  shade  of  his  charity  till  God 
finishes  his  judgment  of  the  people.  He  said;  Charity  appeases 
the  wrath  of  God.  He  who  gives  charity  from  his  abundant 
wealth  is  not  better  in  rewards  than  one  who  takes  it  at  the  time  of 
his  need. 

The  Prophet  was  once  asked:  Which  charity  is  best?  He  said: 
Your  charity  at  the  time  when  you  are  sound,  when  you  do  not 
wish  to  spend,  when  you  hope  to  live  long  or  when  you  fear 
hunger.  Don't  make  delay  in  giving  charity  lest  you  may  say 
when  you  will  be  dying:  I  give  this  thing  to  such  person  and  this 
thing  to  such  person.  One  day,  the  Prophet  said:  Give  charity. 
One  man  said:  I  have  got  a  dinar.  He  said,  spend  it  for  you  He 
said:  I  have  got  another  dinar.  He  said  spend  it  for  your  wife.  He 
said:  I  have  got  another  dinar.  He  said:  Spend  it  for  your  children. 
He  said:  I  have  got  another  dinar.  He  said:  Spend  it  for  your 
servant.  He  said:  I  have  got  anothe  dinar.  He  said:  Your  look  is 
best  for  it.  The  Prophet  said:  Zakat  is  not  lawful  for  the  family 


Vol-I  ZAKAT  177 

members  of  Muhammad.  It  is  the  impurity  of  the  people.  He  said: 
Return  the  rebuke  of  a  beggar  by  giving  food  even  to  the  measure 
of  the  head  of  a  bird.  The  Prophet  said:  He  will  not  get  salvation 
who  refuses  a  beggar  who  speaks  the  truth.  Jesus  Christ  said: 
Angels  do  not  enter  the  house  of  a  man  for  seven  days  who  turns 
out  a  beggar  from  his  door  disappointed.  Our  Prophet  did  not 
entrust  two  duties  to  anybody-to  collect  his  water  of  ablution  for 
his  prayer  at  night  and  to  give  charity  to  the  poor.  The  Prophet 
said:  He  who  is  driven  away  by  you  not  even  with  two  dates  is 
not  a  destitute  but  a  destitute  is  he  who  refrains  from  begging.  If 
you  wish,  read  this  verse:  They  do  not  come  to  man  begging.  The 
Prophet  said:  A  Muslim  who  gives  a  cloth  to  another  Muslim  is  in 
protection  of  God  till  the  cloth  remains  upon  his  body. 

Wise  sayings:  Harat  Urwah-b-Jubair  narrated  that  some  time 
Hazrat  Ayesha  gave  charity  of  50,000  dirhams  though  her  shirt 
was  stitched.  Cod  says:  They  give  food  out  of  His  love  to  the 
destitute,  ophans  and  captives.  Mujahed  explained  this  verse  by 
saying  that  they  did  it  out  of  eagernes.  Hazrat  Omar  said:  O  God, 
give  riches  to  the  good  among  us,  that  they  may  do  benefit  to  the 
needy.  Caliph  Ornar-b- Abdul  Aziz  said:  Prayer  will  take  you  to 
half  of  the  royal  path,  fast  will  take  you  to  the  royal  door  and 
charity  will  take  you  to  the  king  himself.  Ibn  Abi  Zaidan  said: 
Charity  shuts  up  70  doors  of  evils.  The  excellence  of  secret  charity 
is  seventy  times  more  than  that  of  open  charity  and  secret  charity 
destroys  seventy  evils.  Hazrat  Ibn  Masud  said  that  a  man  did 
divine  service  for  seventy  years.  Then  he  committed  a  grievous 
sin  for  which  his  entire  good  deeds  were  rendered  Void.  Then  he 
passed  by  a  poor  man  and  gave  a  bread  to  him  for  which  God 
forgave  him  and  returned  1  im  the  rewads  of  the  divine  services 
for  seventy  years.  Loqman  ad  viced  his  son:  When  you  commit  a 
sin,  give  charity.  Hazrat  Ihya-b-Muaz  said:  I  don't  know  whether 
a  seed  except  a  seed  of  charity  is  heavier  than  a  mountain.  Caliph 
Abdul  Aziz  said:  Paradise  has  got  three  secret  tresures  to  conceal 
disease,  to  conceal  charity  and  to  conceal  troubles  and 
difficulties.  The  saint  Nakhyi  said:  When  a  thing  is  given  in 
charity  for  God,  I  don't  like  that  it  should  have  any  defect.  Hazrat 
Obaid-b-Umair  said:  On  the  Resurrection  Day,  a  man  will  get 
hungry  not  being  hungry,  thirsty  not  being  thirsty  and  naked 
Without  being  naked.  God  will  give  food  to  one  who  gives  food 
for  the  sake  of  God.  He  will  give  water  to  drink  to  one  who  gives 
water  to  drink  for  the  sake  of  God.  He  will  give  cloth  to  one  who 


178  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

gives  cloth  for  the  sake  of  God.  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  If  God 
willed,  all*  would  have  been  rich  and  nobody  would  have  been 
poor  among  you,  but  He  wishes  to  try  you  by  one  another. 

BENEFITS  OF  SECRET  CHARITY 

(1)  It  protects  the  secrecy  of  the  receiver  of  charity.  In  open 
charity,  his  manliness  is  curbed  and  his  want  is  exposed.  The 
secret  charity  gives  no  encouragement  to  begging.  (2)  The 
receiver  remains  safe  from  the  tongues  of  the  people.  Many  a 
time,  the  receiver  is  hated  by  the  people  in  case  of  open 
acceptance  of  charity.  The  sage  Abu  Ayub  said:  I  gave  up  putting 
on  new  cloth  for  fear  of  creating  hatred  in  the  mind  of  my 
neighbour.  (3-)  Secret  charity  helps  the  giver  to  conceal  his 
charity,  as  the  excellence  of  secret  charity  is  greater  than  that  of 
open  charity.  To  help  the  perfection  of  a  good  deed  is  also  a  good 
deed.  One  man  gave  charity  to  a  Sufi  in  presence  of  the  Prophet. 
He  did  not  accept  it.  (4)  There  is  no  disgrace  in  accepting  secret 
charity.  It  is  not  the  duty  of  a  believer  to  humiliate  anybody.  A 
certain  learned  man  refused  to  accept  charity  openly  as  he  said 
that  it  disgraces  learning.  (5)  Secret  charity  removes  the  doubts  of 
a  cosharer.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  is  given  present  in  presence 
of  some  men,  then  all  become  cosharers  in  the  present.  The 
Prophet  said:  The  best  charity  to  a  brother  is  his  giving  food  or 
money. 

BENEFITS  OF  OPEN  CHARITY:  (1)  If  it  is  given  with 
sincerity  and  honesty,  one  can  be  safe  from  change  of  condition 
and  show.  (2)  Honour  is  removed  and  humility  is  exposed.  (3) 
One  can  remain  safe  from  Shirk  in  case  of  open  charity.  It  is 
narrated  that  a  spiritual  guide  was  inclined  to  one  of  his  disciples 
more  than  to  anybody  else.  This  gave  trouble  to  his  other 
disciples.  The  spiritual  guide  intended  to  expose  the  supremacy 
of  his  favoured  one  and  therefore  he  gave  to  each  of  his  disciples 
one  cock  with  a  knife  saying:  You  will  sacrifice  it  so  that  nobody 
sees  it.  Each  of  them  went  to  a  distant  place  and  sacrified  his  cock 
except  the  disciple  whom  he  loved.  The  atter  returned  the  cock 
and  the  knife  to  him  without  sacrifing  it.  The  spiritual  guide  said 
to  him:  They  have  brought  the  cocks  according  to  my  instruction 
but  why  did  you  not  bring  it  accordingly?  He  said:  I  have  found 
no  place  where  nobody  could  see  me  as  God  sees  me  in  every 
place.  The  guide  then  said  to  his  other  disciples:  For  this  reason,  I 
am  inclined  more  to  this  disciple  as  his  look,  is  always  towards 


Vol-I  ZAKAT  179 

God.  (4)  In  case  of  open  charity,  the  sunnat  of  gratefulness  is 
expressed.  God  says:  As  for  the  gifts  of  your  Lord,  proclaim  it.  To 
conceal  a  gift  is  like  rejecting  it.  If  a  man  conceals  what  has  been 
given  to  him  by  God,  God  rebukes  him.  He  attached  it  with 
miserliness.  God  says:  Those  who  are  misers  and  tell  the  people 
to  be  misers  and  conceal  of  the  gifts  which  God  has  given  them.' 
The  Prophet  said:  If  God  gives  a  gift  to  a  servant,  He  likes  that  it 
should  be  expressed  by  him.  The  Refugees  asked  the  Prophet 
once  about  gratefulness;  O  Messenger  of  God,  we  are  guests  of 
the  Ansars  and  we  have  not  seen  better  people  than  them.  They 
have  divided  their  wealth  and  properties  among  us,  we  fear  that 
they  would  take  all  rewards.  The  Prophet  said:  The  gratefulness 
that  you  express  to  them  for  every  matter  and  your  praising  them 
are  your  return  good. 

When  you  have  understood  about  the  benefits  of  open 
charity  and  secret  charity,  you  have  come  to  know  that  the 
differences  arise  out  of  conditions  of  mind.  So  it  depends  on  the 
state  of  your  mind  at  the  time  of  charity.  The  Prophet  praised  a 
man,  because  he  knew  that  it  would  not  injure  him.  He  once  said 
to  a  man:  When  any  honourable  man  of  a  tribe  comes  to  ydu, 
honour  him.  The  Prophet  once  was  pleased  with  a  man  when  he 
heard  of  his  quality  and  said:  There  is  surely  a  charm  in  oratory. 
The  Prophet  said:  When  anybody  among  you  finds  a  good 
attribute  in  his  brother,  let  him  tell  him  of  it,  as  it  will  give  him 
encouragement  to  do  good  works.  The  Prophet  said:  When  a 
believer  is  praised,  faith  increases  in  his  mind.  Sufiyan  Saori  said: 
Praise  cannot  injure  a  man  who  knows  his  mind.  . 


CHAPTER  VI 

FASTING 

Fast  is  one-fourth  of  faith,  as  the  Prophet  said:  Fast  is  half  of 
patience  and  patience  is  half  of  faith.  Of  all  the  regulations  of 
religion,  fast  keeps  special  connection  with  God.  The  Prophet 
said:  God  says:  Every  good  action  except  fast  will  be  rewarded 
from  ten  to  seven  hundred  folds,  but  fast  is  only  for  My  sake  and 
it  is  I  who  will  reward  him  for  it.  God  says:  Those  who  are  patient 
will  be  given  rewards  without  measure  -  39  :  13.  Fast  is  half  of 
patience.  Its  reward  transcends  account.  The  excellence  of  fast  is 
known  from  the  following  Hadis:  The  Prophet  said:  By  One  in 
whose  hand  there  is  my  life,  the  fragrance  of  the  mouth  of  a 
fasting  man  is  dearer  to  God  than  the  fragrance  of  musk.  God 
says:  The  fasting  man  gives  up  sexual  intercourse,  found  says: 
The  fasting  man  gives  up  sexual  intercourse,  food  and  drink  for 
My  sake.  So  fast  is  kept  only  for  My  sake  and  it  is  I  who  will 
reward  him  for  it.  The  Prophet  said:  Paradise  has  got  a  gate 
named  Rayyan.  None  except  a  fasting  man  will  enter  Paradise  by 
that  gate.  God  has  promised  His  vision  as  reward  of  fast. 

The  Prophet  said:  There  are  two  joys  for  a  fasting  man  -  one 
joy  at  the  time  of  breaking  fast  and  another  joy  at  the  time  of 
meeting  with  his  Lord.  The  Prophet  said:  Everything  has  got  a 
gateway.  Fast  is  the  gateway  of  worship.  He  said:  The  sleep  of  a 
fasting  man  is  worship.  He  said:  When  the  month  of  Ramzan 
comes,  the  gates  of  Paradise  are  opened  and  the  gates  of  Hell  are 
shut  up,  the  devils  are  put  in  chains  and  a  proclaimer  proclaims: 
O  seeker  of  good,  advance.  O  seeker  of  evil,  come  back.  God  says: 
Eat  and  drink  cheerfully  for  what  you  missed  in  past  days.  In 
other  words,  eat  and  drink  cheerfully  for  what  you  were 
deprived  in  your  tasting  days.  The  Prophet  said:  God  will  make 
His  angels  view  with  an  ascetic  saying:  O  young  man  who  has 
suppressed  his  passions  for  My  sake  and  who  has  spent  his  youth 
for  My  sake,  you  are  to  Me  like  some  of  My  angels. 

The  Prophet  said  about  a  fasting  man:  God  says:  O  My 
angels,  look  to  My  servant,  he  has  given  up  his  sexual  passion, 
his  pleasures,  his  food  and  drink  for  My  pleasure.  God  says:  *No 
soul  knows  what  has  been  kept  concealed  for  him  pleasing  to  his 
eyes.  This  is  the  reward  for  what  they  have  done'.  It  has  been  said 
regarding  the  verse  that  this  action  was  fast,  as  God  says:  The 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  181 

patient  will  be  given  rewards  without  account  (39 :  13).  It  appears 
from  this  that  rewards  will  be  open  for  the  fasting  men  and  they 
will  not  be  kept  for  measurement  as  it  is  only  for  God.  All 
worships  are  for  God  but  the  honour  of  fast  is  like  that  of  the 
Ka'ba.  Everything  in  the  world  has  got  a  speciality.  The  speciality 
of  fasting  is  forbearance  and  sacrifice,  as  it  is  the  action  of  the 
mind  and  secret  from  public  eye,  but  all  other  actions  fall  within 
human  eyes.  Nobody  sees  fast  except  God  as  it  is  a  secret  action 
with  sincere  patience.  Secondly,  it  is  punishment  for  the  enemy 
of  God  as  the  way  of  the  devil  is  sexual  passion  and  it  increases 
through  the  help  of  food  and  drink.  For  this  reason,  the  Prophet 
said:  The  devil  runs  through  human  body  like  the  circulation  of 
blood.  Curb  it  by  hunger.  For  this  reason,  the  Prophet  said  to 
Ayesha;  Knock  at  the  door  of  Paradise.  She  asked:  How?  The 
Prophet  said:  With  hunger,  specially  when  fast  controls  the  devil, 
shut  his  path  and  make  narrow  his  passage.  Then  its  connection 
remains  with  only  God.  If  the  enemy  of  God  is  controlled,  it  will 
be  helping  God. 

God  says:  If  you  help  God,  God  will  help  you  and  will  make 
your  feet  firm  -  47  :  8.  So  at  the  beginning,  a  servant  will  make 
efforts  and  then  hope  for  reward  of  God.  For  this  reason,  God 
Says:  I  will  show  certainty  My  path  to  those  who  strive  hard  for  us 
(29 :  69).  God  says:  God  does  not  change  the  condition  of  a  people 
unless  they  change  their  own  condition  (13  :  12).  This  change  is 
said  to  be  due  to  increase  of  sexual  passion  as  it  is  the  grazing 
field  of  the  devil  and  a  place  for  his  movement.  The  devil  moves 
in  it  till  it  is  fertile.  God's  light  is  hot  disclosed  to  the  person  in 
whom  he  moves.  The  Prophet  said:  If  the  devil  had  not  moved  in 
the  human  minds,  they  could  have  surely  known  the  mysteries  of 
heaven.  For  this  reason,  fast  is  the  door  of  worship  and  its  shield. 
When  the  excellence  of  fast  is  so  wide,  its  secret  and  open 
conditions  and  its  rules  and  regulations  should  be  known  and 
they  will  be  discussed  in  three  sections. 


SECTION  1 

SIX  COMPULSORY  DUTIES  OF  FAST 

(1)  To  seek  the  new  moon  of  Ramzan.  If  there  is  cloud,  thirty 
days  of  Shaban  must  be  completed.  The  sight  of  the  new  moon  of 
Ramzan  is  based  only  on  the  evidence  of  one  just  man  of  intellect, 


.182  FASTING  Vol-I 

while  the  moon  of  I'dul  Fitr  is  based  on  the  evidence  of  two  just 
pious  Muslims.  If  the  new  moon  is  seen  in  one  place  and  is  not 
seen  in  another  place  and  if  the  distance  between  the  two  places 
in  less  than  about  two  miles,  it  is  compulsory  for  the  inhabitants 
of  both  the  places  to  keep  fast.  If  however  the  distance  is  more, 
the  inhabitants  of  each  place  will  decide  the  case  separately. 

(2)  TO  MAKE  NIYYAT  OF  FASTING:  To  make  niyyat  every 
night  with  firm  faith  is  compulsory.  One  niyyat  for  full  Ramzan 
month  is  not  sufficient.  If  there  is  no  niyyat  of  compulsory  fast,  it 
will  he  considered  as  optional  fast.  So  niyyat  should  be  made 
every  night. 

(3)  No  to  admit  anything  outside  in  the  body  willingly 
during  fast.  If  a  man  eats  something,  drinks  something  and  does 
any  such  act,  it  will  break  fast.  If  a  man  gets  cupping,  it  will  not 
spoil  his  fast.  If  water  enters  the  belly  unwillingly,  it  will  not 
spoil  fast. 

(4)  Abstinence  from  sexual  intercourse  during  fast.  If 
through  mistake,  a  fasting  man  has  got  sexual  intercourse,  it  will 
not  spoil  his  fasting. 

(5)  Abstinence  from  deliberate  emission  of  semen.  If 
deliberately  semen  is  emitted,  it  will  break  fast. 

(6)  Abstinence  from  deliberate  vomiting.  Wilful  vomiting 
breaks  fast. 

ATONEMENT  FOR  BREAK  OF  A  FAST 

There  are  four  modes  of  compulsory  atonement  of  fast  if  it 
breaks.  (1)  Making  amends.  It  is  compulsory  on  every  major 
Muslim  to  keep  fast  on  other  days  for  break  of  fast  in  Ramzan.  A 
menstruating  woman  must  compulsorily  keep  fast  on  other  days. 
One  need  not  keep  Qaza  fast  consequitively.  (2)  Kaffara  or 
Atonement  is  not  compulsory  except  in  case  of  sexual  intercourse 
in  which  case  one  is  to  set  free  a  slave  or  fast  for  two  consequitive 
months,  failing  that  to  feed  sixty  poor  men  with  one  meal.  (3) 
Imsak  or  refraining  oneself  from  food  drink,  and  from  sexual 
intercourse.  If  a  man  breaks  fast  carelessly  but  without  excuse,  it 
is  compulsory  on  him  to  refrain  from  food,  drink  and  sexual 
intercourse  for  the  remaining  portion  of  the  day.  (4)  Fidya  or 
expiation:  if  a  pregnant  or  suckling  woman  does  not  keep  fast  for 
fear  of  her  child,  it  is  compulsory  on  her  to  give  its  compensation 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  183 

by  giving  one  Mud  food-stuff  to  a  poor  man  and  she  will  have  to 
fast  Qaza  in  addition.  If  an  old-man  of  age  is  unable  to  keep  fast, 
he  may  compensate  each  fast  by  giving  food  crops  of  one  Mud  for 
each  day. 

SUNNATS  OF  FAST  ARE  SIX:  (1)  To  eat  Sehri  latter,  (2)  to 
break  fast  before  Magrib  prayer  with  dates  or  water,  (3)  not  to 
cleanse  teeth  after  mid-day  (4)  to  give  charity,  (5)  to  recite  the 
Quran,  (6)  and  to  observe  V  tekafin  a  mosque  in  the  last  ten  nights 
of  Ramzan  month.  This  was  the  habit  of  the  Prophet  of  God. 
When  the  ten  nights  of  Ramzan  remained,  he  prepared  himself 
for  greater  divine  service  for  the  remaining  days  of  Ramzan  and 
ordered  the  inmates  of  the  house  to  do  the  same.  He  used  to  stay 
in  the  mosque  without  coming  out  of  it  except  when  pressed  by 
necessity  such  as  calls  of  nature. 


SECTION  2 

SECRETS  OF  FAST 

Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  there  are  three  classes  of  fast.  (1) 
fast  of  the  general  Muslims.  It  is  to  restrain  oneself  from  eating 
and  drinking  and  from  sexual  passion.  This  is  the  lowest  kind  of 
fast.  (2)  Fast  of  the  few  select  Muslims.  In  this  kind  of  fasting, 
besides  the  above  things,  one  refrains  himself  from  sins  of  hands, 
feet,  sight  and  other  limbs  of  body.  (3)  Fast  of  the  highest  class. 
These  people  keep  fast  of  mind.  In  other  words,  they  don't  think 
of  anything  else  except  God  and  the  next  world.  They  think  only 
of  the  world  with  the  intention  of  the  next  world  as  it  is  the  seed 
ground  for  the  future.  A  certain  sage  said:  One  sin  is  written  for 
one  whose  efforts  during  the  day  are  made  only  to  prepare  for 
breaking  fast.  This  highest  class  of  people  are  the  Prophets  and 
the  near  ones  of  God.  This  kind  of  fast  is  kept  after  sacrificing 
oneself  and  his  thoughts  fully  to  God.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the 
verse:  Say  God  and  then  leave  them  sporting  in  their  vain  talks 
(6:91). 

The  fasting  of  select  for  pious  men  rests  on  six  duties  for 
gaining  perfection.  (1)  To  restrain  eye  sight  from  what  is  evil  and 
from  things  which  divert  attention  from  God's  remembrance. 
The  Prophet  said:  Eye  sight  is  a  poisonous  arrow  out  of  the 
arrows  of  the  devil.  If  a  man  gives  it  up,  God  gives  him  such  a 
faith  of  which  the  taste  is  tasted  by  his  mind.  The  Prophet  said: 


184  FASTING  Vol-I 

Five  things  destroys  fasting  -  falsehood,  back-biting,  slander, 
perjury  and  sight  with  sexual  passion.  (2)  To  restrain  the  tongue 
from  useless  talk,  false-speaking,  back-biting,  slander,  abusive 
speech,  obscenity,  hypocrisy  and  enmity,  to  adopt  silence  and  to 
keep  the  tongue  busy  with  the  remembrance  of  God  and  reciting 
the  Quran.  The  sage  Sufiyan  Saori  said:  Back-biting  spoils  fast. 
Hazrat  Muzahed  said:  Two  things  spoil  fast,  back-biting  and 
falsehood.  The  Prophet  said:  Fast  is  like  a  shield.  If  a  man  keeps 
fast,  let  him  not  rebuke  and  dispute.  If  a  man  wants  to  assault  or 
make  quarrel,  let  him  say  to  him:  I  am  fasting.  There  is  in  Hadis: 
Two  women  kept  fast  at  the  time  of  the  Prophet.  They  were  so 
much  overstickens  with  hungers  at  the  end  of  the  day  that  their 
lives  were  about  to  end.  They  were  sent  to  the  Prophet  so  that  he 
might  order  them  to  break  fast.  He  sent  a  cup  for  them  telling 
them  that  they  should  vomit  in  it  what  they  ate.  One  of  them 
vomitted  fresh  blood  and  fresh  flesh  which  filled  up  half  of  the 
cup.  Another  vomitted  similarly  and  filled  up  the  cup.  The 
Prophet  then  said:  The  two  women  fasted  with  lawful  food  but 
broke  it  with  unlawful  food.  The  two  women  back-bited  the 
people  and  ate  their  flesh. 

(3)  To  restrain  the  ear  from  hearing  the  evil  talks  because 
what  is  unlawful  to  utter  is  also  unlawful  to  hear.  For  this  reason, 
God  placed  the  eater  of  unlawful  food  and  the  hearer  of  unlawful 
words  on  the  same  level.  God  says:  The  hearers  of  falsehood  and 
eaters  of  unlawful  food  -  5:46.  God  says:  Why  do  not  the  God- 
fearing men  and  the  worldly  renunciated  men  prohibit  talking 
sinful  words  and  unlawful  eating  -  5:68?  To  remain  silent  at  the 
time  of  back-biting  is  unlawful.  God  says:  You  are  then  like  them 
-  9  :  139.  Thus  said  the  Prophet:  The  back-biter  and  the  hearer  of 
back-biting  are  equal  cosharers  in  sin. 

(4)  To  save  hand,  feet  and  other  organs  from  sins,  from  evil 
deeds  and  to  save  belly  from  doubtful  things  at  the  time  of 
breaking  fast.  There  is  no  meaning  of  fasting  if  it  is  kept  with 
lawful  food  and  broken  with  unlawful  food.  He  is  like  a  man 
who  destroys  a  town  for  constructing  a  building.  It  is  also 
injurious  to  eat  lawful  food  in  excess  and  hot  to  eat  it  little.  He 
who  fasts  and  does  evil  deeds  is  like  a  patient  who  restrains 
himself  from  eating  fruits  for  fear  of  disease  but  who  swallows 
poison.  A  sin  is  like  eating  poison.  He  who  drinks  this  poison 
.is  a  fool.  An  unlawful  thing  is  like  poison  and  it  destroys 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  185 

religion  and  a  lawful  thing  is  like  a  medicine.  Its  little  does 
benefit  and  its  much  spoils.  The  Prophet  said:  There  are  many 
fasting  men  who  do  not  gain  by  fasting  except  hunger  and  thirst. 
On  being  asked  the  reason,  he  said:  He  refrains  from  eating 
lawful  food  and  breaks  fast  by  eating  human  flesh  by  back-biting. 
That  is  unlawful. 

(5)  To  eat  even  lawful  food  so  much  at  the  time  of  breaking 
fast  that  it  fills  up  the  belly.  A  belly  filled  up  with  too  much 
lawful  food  is  hated  more  than  all  other  reservoirs.  A  fasting  man 
eats  in  full  at  the  time  of  breaking  fast  what  he  could  not  eat 
during  day  time.  He  prepares  different  kinds  of  foods.  The  object 
of  fast  is  to  keep  belly  vacant  in  order  to  control  passion  and  to 
increase  God-fear.  If  the  belly  remains  full  from  morning  to 
evening,  sexual  passion  rises  high  and  greed  and  temptation 
reign  supreme. 

(6)  To  keep  the  mind  of  a  fasting  man  between  fear  and  hope, 
because  he  does  not  know  whether  his  fast  will  be  accepted  or 
not,  whether  he  will  be  near  God  or  not.  This  should  be  the  case 
for  every  divine  service.  Once  Hasan  Basri  was  passing  by  a  party 
of  men  who  were  playing  and  sporting.  He  said:  God  made  this 
month  of  Ramzan  for  running  in  which  the  people  will  be 
running  for  good  deeds  and  competing  with  one  another.  The 
object  of  fast  is  to  anoint  one  with  one  of  the  divine  attributes. 
That  attributes.  That  attribute  is  Samadiat  meaning  to  be  bereft  of 
hunger  and  thirst  and  to  follow  the  angels  as  far  as  possible  being 
free  from  passion.  The  rank  of  a  man  is  far  more  superior  than 
that  of  a  lov/er  animal  as  he  can  control  his  passion  by  dint  of  his 
intellect,  but  his  rank  is  lower  than  that  of  an  angel  as  his  passion 
is  strong  and  he  is  tried  by  it.  Angels  are  near  God.  This  nearness 
keeps  connection  with  attribute  but  not  with  space.  The  Prophet 
said:  Fast  is  a  trust.  Let  everyone  of  you  keep  that  trust.  When  he 
read  this  verse.  "God  orders  you  to  give  trust  to  its  rightful 
owners  (4  :  61)."  he  placed  his  hands  on  his  ears  and  eyes  and 
said:  Ear  is  a  trust  and  eye  is  a  trust.  If  it  had  not  been  a  trust  of 
fasting,  the  Prophet  would  not  have  said:  I  am  fasting.  In  other 
words,  I  have  kept  my  tongue  as  trust  for  saving  it.  How  can  I 
give  it  up  for  replying  you?  So  it  appears  that  for  every  affair 
there  are  secret  and  open  matters.  It  is  now  open  to  you  to 
observe  both  the  secret  and  open  matters  or  to  observe  either  of 
them. 


186  FASTING  Vol-I 

SECTION  3 

OPTIONAL  FAST  AND  ITS  RULES 

Know,  O  dear  readers  that  additional  fasts  are  sunnat  if 
observed  in  the  days  of  good  and  excellence.  Some  of  these  days 
occur  every  year,  some  every  month  and  some  every  week.  Those 
which  occur  every  year  are  the  days  of  Arafat,  the  days  of 
Ashura,  the  first  ten  days  of  the  month  of  Zilhaj,  the.first  ten  days 
of  the  month  of  Muharram  and  all  holy  months.  The  Prophst 
used  to  fast  most  in  the  month  of  Shaban.  There  is  in  one  Hadis: 
Of  all  the  fasts  after  the  fast  of  the  month  of  Ramzan,  the  best  fast 
is  in  the  month  of  Muharram  as  it  is  the  beginning  of  the  year  and 
founded  on  good  and  most  dear  for  blessing.  The  Prophet  said: 
One  day's  fast  in  the  holy  month  is  better  than  the  fast  for  thirty 
other  days.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  fasts  for  three  days, 
Thursday,  Friday  and  Saturday  in  the  holy  month  God  writes  for 
him  divine  service  of  seven  hundred  years  in  lieu  of  every  day. 
There  is  in  Hadis:  When  half  of  Shaban  passes,  there  is  no  fast  up 
to  Ramzan.  It  is  not  lawful  to  keep  fast  for  two  or  three  days 
before  Ramzan.  Zil-haj,  Muharram,  Rajab  and  Shaban  -are  the 
months  of  excellence  and  Jil  Qaedah,  Zil-Haj,  Muharram  and 
Rajab  are  the  holy  months,  Zil-Haj  is  the  best  among  them  as 
there  is  therein  the  day  of  Haj  and  fixed  days.  There  is  in  Hadis: 
Divine  service  for  the  first  ten  days  of  Zil-haj  is  dearer  to  God 
than  that  in  other  months.  Fast  of  one  day  during  these  days  is 
equal  to  fast  of  one  year  and  one  nighf  s  prayer  is  equal  to  the 
prayer  of  the  Blessed  night.  They  asked:  Is  the  reward  better  than 
that  of  Jihad?  He  said:  Not  that  of  even  Jihad  in  the  way  of  God, 
but  the  reward  is  equal  to  that  of  the  Jihad  of  a  man  in  which  his 
horse  is  wounded  and  he  himself  is  martyred. 

MONTHLY  FAST:  The  days  of  month  in  which  fast  are  to  be 
kept  are  the  first  day,  middle  day  and  the  last  day  of  every  month. 
In  addition,  there  is  the  fast  of  Ayyam  Biz  on  the  13th,  14th  and 
15th  of  the  moon. 

WEEKLY  FAST:  In  every  week,  Thursday,  Friday  and 
Monday  are  good.  These  are  the  days  of  excellence. 

ANNUAL  FAST:  The  best  way  is  to  keep  fast  for  one  day  and 
break  it  on  the  following  day;  The  Prophet  said:  The  treasures  of 
the  world  were  presented  to  me.  I  rejected  them  and  said:  I  shall 
remain  hungry  for  one  day  and  take  food  on  another.  When  I 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  187 

shall  take  food,  I  shall  praise  thee  and  when  I  shall  remain 
hungry  I  shall  seek  humility  from  Thee.  The  Prophet  said:  The 
best  fast  is  that  of  my  brother  Daud.  He  fasted  for  are  day  and 
broke  it  on  the  following  day.  The  Prophet  instructed 
Abdullah-b-Amr  to  fast  thus.  He  said:  I  shall  be  able  to  fast  more. 
The  Prophet  said:  Fast  for  one  day  and  break  fast  on  the  following 
day.  He  said:  I  wish  to  keep  better  fast  than  this.  Then  the  Prophet 
'said:  There  is  no  better  fast  than  this.  It  is  reported  that  the 
Prophet  did  not  fast  any  full  month  except  Ramzan. 

It  has  been  reported  that  the  Prophet  sometimes  continued  to 
fast  in  such  a  way  that  the  people  thought  that  he  won't  break  it 
and  sometimes  he  continued  to  keep  no  fast  till  the  people 
thought  that  he  won't  keep  fast.  He  slept  sometimes  in  such  a 
way  that  the  people  thought  that  he  won't  rise  from  bed  and 
sometimes  he  kept  wakeful  in  such  a  way  that  the  people  thought 
that  he  won't  sleep  again. 


CHAPTER  VII 

SECRETS  OF  PILGRIMAGE 

Pilgrimage  is  one  of  the  pillars  of  Islam,  the  beauty  of  divine 
service  for  the  whole  life,  the  end  of  actions,  the  perfection  of 
Islam  and  the  foundation  of  religion.  On  the  day  of  pilgrimage, 
God  revealed  the  following  verse:  Today  I  have  perfected  your 
religion  for  you  and  made  My  gifts  perfect  on  you  and  I  am 
pleased  to  give  you  Islam  as  a  religion  -5:3.  The  Prophet  said 
regarding  it:  He  who  dies  without  making  pilgrimage,  dies 
willingly  as  a  Jew  or  a  Christian.'  So  how  important  is  that  divine 
service  without  which  religion  does  not  become  perfect  and  one 
becomes  a  Jew  or  a  Christian  or  a  misguided  one.  It  will, 
therefore,  he  discussed  in  three  sections. 

SECTION  1 

EXCELLENCE  OF  PILGRIMAGE:  God  says:  Proclaim  Haj 
among  the  people,  so  that  they  may  come  to  you  on  foot  or  upon 
every  camel  coming  from  every  distant  place  (Quran).  Qatadah 
said:  God  ordered  Hazrat  Abraham,  our  Prophet  and  all  chosen 
servants  -  Proclaim  Haj  among  their  people.  Then  he  proclaimed: 
O  people,  God  created  a  house,  make  pilgrimage  for  it.  God  says: 
'that  they  may  witness  benefits  for  them'.  It  means  trade  and 
rewards  in  the  next  world.  A  certain  sage  said  about  it:  By  Lord  of 
the  Ka'ba,  He  has  forgiven  them.  God  mentions  the  devil  as 
saying:  I  shall  sit  for  them  in  your  straight  path.  Some  say  that  the 
devil  will  be  sitting  in  the  paths  towards  Mecca  to  prevent  the 
people  from  making  pilgrimage.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who 
makes  pilgrimage  without  doing  any  obscene  deed  and  without 
making  quarrel  comes  out  of  his  sins  as  on  the  day  when  his 
mother  gave  birth  to  him.  The  Prophet  said:  The  devil  does  not 
become  so  much  humiliated,  dishonoured  and  disgraced  as  on 
the  day  of  Arafat.  The  cause  is  that  he  sees  God's  blessings 
descending  and  His  forgiveness  of  great  sins.  The  Prophet  said: 
there  is  some  sins  out  of  sins  which  are  not  forgiven  except 
without  waiting  at  Arafat.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  comes  out 
of  his  house  with  the  intention  of  making  pilgrimage  or  Umrah, 
there  will  be  written  for  him  the  rewards  of  one  pilgrimage  and 
one  Umrah  up  to  the  Resurrection  Day.  He  who  dies  at  Mecca  or 
Medina,  will  not  be  presented  for  account  and  no  account  will  be 
taken  from  him  and  he  will  be  said:  Enter  Paradise.  The  Prophet 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  189 

said:  There  is  no  rewards  except  Paradise  for  an  accepted  Haj. 
The  Prophet  said:  Those  who  make  pilgrimage  and  Umrah  are 
guests  and  neighbours  of  God.  If  they  pray,  it  is  accepted  from 
them.  If  they  seek  forgiveness,  God  forgives  them.  If  they  invoke, 
their  invocation  is  accepted.  If  they  intercede,  it  is  accepted. 
There  is  in  another  Hadis:  He  whose  sins  are  greatest  is  a  person 
who  thinks  at  Arafat  that  God  has  not  forgiven  his  sins.  The 
Prophet  said:  120  blessings  descend  everyday  on  this  Ka'ba  sixty 
for  those  who  make  Tawaf,  forty  for  those  who  pray  and  twenty 
for  those  who  visit  the  Ka'ba.  There  is  in  Hadis:  Make  much 
Tawaf  because  it  is  such  a  great  thing  that  you  will  find  it  in  your 
book  of  deeds  on  the  Resurrection  day  and  for  which  people  will 
envy  you.  For  this  reason,  to  make  Tawaf  at  first  before  Haj  and 
Umrah  is  commendable.  There  is  in  Hadis:  He  who  makes  Tawaf 
for  a  week  barefooted  and  bare  bodies  will  get  the  reward  of 
setting  free  a  slave.  Whose  makes  Tawaf  in  rains  for  a  week,  his 
past  sins  are  forgiven.  A  certain  sage  said:  If  the  Arafat  Day  and 
the  Jumma  Day  occur  on  the  same  day,  every  person  at  Arafat  is 
forgiven  and  that  is  the  best  day  in  the  world.  On  that  day  the 
farewell  pilgrimage  of  the  Holy  Prophet  took  place  and  on  that 
day,  the  verse  was  revealed  -  To-day  I  have  perfected  for  you 
your  religion,  bestowed  My  favours  completely  on  you  and 
chosen  for  you  Islam  as  a  religion  -  5 :  53. 

The  people  of  the  Book  said:  If  the  verse  would  have  been 
revealed  upon  us,  we  would  have  observed  it  as  a  day  of  festival. 
Hazrat  Omar  said:  I  bear  witness  that  mis  verse  was  revealed  on 
the  Prophet  on  the  day  of  two  festivals,  the  day  of  Arafat  an<-. 
Jumma  day  and  he  was  then  waiting  at  Arafat.  The  Prophet  said: 
Forgive  one  who  has  come  for  pilgrimage,  O  God,  forgive  one 
who  seeks  forgiveness  for  a  pilgrim.  Hazrat  Omar  said:  A  pilgrim 
is  forgiven  and  also  the  man  for  whom  he  seeks  forgiveness  in 
Zilhaj,  Muharram,  Safar  or  the  first  part  of  Rabiul  Awal.  It  was 
the  custom  of  the  ancient  sages  that  they  broadcasted  the  stories 
of  warriors,  welcomed  the  pilgrims,  kissed  on  their  foreheads, 
sought  blessings  from  them  and  they  hastened  to  do  these  things 
before  they  would  commit  sins. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  MECCA  AND  KA'BA 

The  Prophet  said:  God  promised  that  every  year  s\x  lacs 
people  will  make  pilgrimage.  If  their  number  becomes  \eis,  God 
will  fill  the  number  by  angels.  The  Ka'ba  will  be  presented  on  the 


190  SECRETS  OF  PILGRIMAGE  Vol-I 

Resurrection  Day,  adorned  with  ornaments  like  a  newly  wedded 
bride  and  those  who  made  pilgrimage  will  be  busy  in  covering  it 
with  cloth.  The  Ka'ba  will  proceed  towards  Paradise  till  it  enters 
it  and  they  will  also  enter  paradise.  There  is  in  Hadis:  The  Black 
Stone  is  a  jewel  out  of  the  jewels  of  Paradise.  It  will  be  raised 
upon  the  Resurrection  Day.  It  will  have  two  eyes  and  one  tongue 
with  which  it  will  speak.  It  will  bear  witness  for  everyone  who 
kissed  it  and  testified  its  truth.  The  Prophet  used  to  kiss  it  much. 
It  was  narrated  that  Hazrat  Omar  once  made  prostration  over  it. 
He  was  then  making  Tawaf  riding  and  he  placed  his  staff  in  his 
hand  on  it  and  kissed  one  end  of  it.  He  said  once  after  kissing  it:  I 
know  certainly  that  you  are  a  mere  piece  of  stone  and  you  can  not 
do  any  benefit  or  harm.  Had  I  not  seen  the  Prophet  kissing  you,  I 
would  never  kissed  you.  Then  he  wept  and  raised  his  voice  high. 
Then  he  said  to  Hazrat  Ali  behind  him:  O  Abul  Hasan,  take 
advice  and  intercede,  your  prayer  will  be  accepted.  Hazrat  Ali 
said :  O  Commander  of  the  Faithful,  it  has  got  benefits  and  harms. 
He  asked:  In  what  way?  He  said:  When  God  took  promise  from 
the  descendants  of  Adam,  He  wrote  a  scroll  on  them  and 
impressed  it  on  this  stone.  It  will  bear  witness  for  those  who 
fulfilled  their  promise  and  against  the  infidels  for  infidelity. 
Hasan  Basari  said:  One  day's  fast  therein  is  equal  to  one  lac  fast 
and  charity  of  one  Dirham  is  equal  to  that  of  one  lac  dirhams. 
Thus  its  reward  increases  to  one  lac.  There  is  in  Hadis:  One 
Umrah  during  Ramzan  is  like  pilgrimage  with  me.  He  said:  I 
shall  be  the  first  man  who  will  burst  out  of  his  grave.  Then  the 
inhabitants  of  Jannatual  Baqi  will  resurrect  with  me,  then  the 
Meccans  and  then  the  people  between  the  two  Harams  (Mecca 
and  Medinah).  There  is  in  Hadis  that  when  Adam  performed  all 
rites  of  pilgrimage,  the  angels  saw  him  and  said:  O  Adam  your 
Haj  has  been  accepted.  We  built  the  Ka'ba  two  thousand  years 
before  you.  There  is  in  Hadis  that  God  looks  to  the  inmates  of  the 
world  every  night.  He  looks  first  to  the  inhabitants  of  Mecca  and 
out  of  them  first  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Ka'ba.  He  forgives  one 
whom  He  sees  making  Tawaf  and  forgives  one  whom  he  sees 
standing  towards  the  Ka'ba  and  forgives  one  whom  He  sees 
praying  in  the  Ka'ba.  A  friend  of  God  said:  The  sun  does  not  set  in 
unless  an  Abdal  makes  Tawaf  of  the  Ka'ba  and  it  does  not  set  in 
unless  a  friend  of  God  makes  its  Tawaf.  When  this  sort  of  Tawaf 
will  end,  it  will  be  the  cause  of  being  lifted  away  from  the  world. 
Then  the  people  will  see  in  the  morning  that  it  has  been  lifted 
away  and  they  will  find  no  sign  therein.  Then  after  it,  nobody  will 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  191 

make  its  pilgrimage  for  seven  years.  The  Anti  Christ  will  appear 
and  Jesus  Christ  will  come  down  and  will  kill  Anti  Christ.  Then 
the  Resurrection  will  come  near.  There  is  in  Hadis:  Before  its 
lifting,  the  Ka'ba  will  be  circumbulated  always.  The  Ka'ba  was 
twice  destroyed  and  it  will  belifted  up  at  the  third  time.  The 
Prophet  said:  God  says:  When  I  will  wish  to  destroy  the  world,  I 
will  begin  it  first  with  My  house  and  will  destroy  it  first.  Then 
immediately  after  it  the  world  will  be  destroyed. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  HABITATION  AT  MECCA 

The  God  fearing  men  disliked  to  live  at  Mecca  for  three 
reasons.  (1)  Fear  of  being  equal  to  Ka'ba,  as  to  be  equal  from  the 
point  of  honour  is  harmful.  When  the  pilgrims  finished 
pilgrimage,  Hazrat  Omar  assembled  them  and  said:  O 
inhabitants  of  Yemen,  go  to  Yemen,  O  inhabitants  of  Iraq,  go  to 
Iraq.  He  said:  I  fear  lest  the  people  inhabit  too  much  in  the  Ka'ba. 
(2)  Eagerness  for  visiting  it  again  owing  to  separation,  as.  God 
made  the  Ka'ba  as  a  refuge  of  the  people  and  a  safe  place.  (3)  Not 
to  live  at  Mecca  for  fear  of  sins  and  guilts  is  better  than  honouring 
the  place.  Hazrat  Ibn  Masud  said:  There  is  no  such  city  except 
Mecca  Wherein  the  people  will  be  punished  for  niyyat  before 
actions.  Then  he  read  this  verse:  If  a  man  wishes  therein  to  do  . 
excessive  oppression,  he  will  be  given  grievous  punishment. 
This  is  only  for  the  Ka'ba.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said:  To  store  up 
food  stuffs  at  Mecca  is  said  to  be  excessive  oppression  within  the 
precincts  of  the  Ka'ba.  He  said:  To  commit  seventy  sins  at  Ruqia 
is  better  to  me  than  to  commit  a  sin  at  Mecca.  Ruqia  is  a  place 
between  Mecca  and  Tayef.  Some  people  feared  so  much  that  they 
even  responded  not  to  their  calls  of  nature  in  the  sacred 
enclosure.  It  is  better  to  live  at  Mecca  if  anybody  does  not  commit 
any  sin.  When  the  Prophet  returned  to  Mecca,  he  turned  his  face 
towards  the  Ka'ba  and  said:  'You  are  the  best  place  to  me  among 
the  places  of  God  and  you  are  the  dearest  city  to  me  among  the 
cities  of  God.  Had  I  not  been  ejected  from  you,  I  would  never 
come  out  of  it?'  Why  should  it  not  be,  as  look  towards  the  Ka'ba  is 
worship  and  if  a  good  deed  is  done  there,  it  brings  abundant 
rewards. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  MEDINAH 

There  is  no  such  better  place  as  Medinah  after  Mecca.  The 
rewards  increase  much  if  a  good  deed  is  done  at  Medina.  The 


192  SECRETS  OF  PILGRIMAGE  Vol-I 

Prophet  Said:  One  prayer  in  my  mosque  brings  rewards  one 
thousand  times  more  than  the  prayer  in  other  mosques  except  the 
mosque  of  Mecca.'  This  is  true  in  case  of  all  good  deeds  done 
here.  After  Medinah,  there  is  the  place  of  Baitul  Muqaddas 
wherein  a  prayer  brings  rewards  five  hundred  times  more  than 
that  in  other  mosques.  This  is  the  case  with  all  other  good  deeds. 
The  Prophet  said:  If  one  prayer  in  the  mosque  of  Medinah  is 
equal  to  ten  thousand  prayers,  one  prayer  in  Baitul  Muqaddas  is 
equal  to  one  thousand  prayers  and  one  prayer  in  the  mosque  of 
Mecca  is  equal  to  one  lac  prayers.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man 
bears  hardships  of  Medinah,  I  shall  be  his  intercessor  on  the 
Resurrection  Day.  The  Prophet  said:  'If  a  man  can  die  at 
Medinah,  let  him  do  it  because  if  a  man  dies  at  Medinah,  I  shall  be 
his  intercessor  on  the  Resurrection  Day/  After  these  three  places, 
all  places  are  equal  except  the  frontiers  of  Islam,  as  guarding  the 
frontiers  of  Islam  is  necessary  from  the  enemies  and  their 
excellence  is  great.  For  this  reason,  the  Prophet  said:  Don't  tie 
your  camel  except  in  three  mosques,  the  mosque  of  the  Ka'ba,  the 
mosque  of  mine  and  the  mosque  of  Baitul  Muqaddas.  The 
Prophet  said:  I  had  prohibited  you  before  to  visit  graves,  but  now 
I  say:  Visit  graves,  but  don't  say  'Hazran'  (I  gave  up).  The 
Prophet  said:  All  places  belong  to  God  and  all  are  servants  of 
God.  Live  in  th  place  you  like  and  praise  God.  There  is  in  Hadis:  If 
a  man  gets  blessings  in  a  thing,  he  should  stick  to  it.  If  a  man  gets 
a  source  of  income,  he  should  not  change  it,  till  that  source  of 
income  is  changed. 

DUTIES  OF  HAJ 

Two  things  are  necessary  for  the  health  of  Haj-Time  and 
Islam.  There  are  five  conditions  of  Haj  which  are  obligatory  -  OX. 
to  be  a  Muslim,  (2)  to  be  a  free  man,  (3)  to  be  intelligent  and  able, 
(4)  to  be  major,  (5)  to  make  Haj  in  time.  One  must  be  of  sound 
health  and  the  route  must  be  safe  and  sound.  He  must  have 
sufficient  money  to  go  and  to  be  back  from  journey  and  for  the 
maintenance  of  the  family  in  the  mean  time.  If  a  man  is  unable  to 
make  pilgrimage  on  account  of  his  physical  illness  or  bodily 
infirmity  from  which  he  has  got  no  hope  of  recovery,  he  must 
send  his  representative  with  expense  to  make  pilgrimage.  A  son 
may  not  take  money  from  his  father  to  make  pilgrimage  on  behalf 
of  his  father.  If  a  man  dies  before  making  pilgrimage  inspite  of  his 
solvency,  there  will  be  grievous  punishment  for  him.  Hazrat 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  193 

Sayeed-b-Jubair,  Ibrahim  Nakhyi,  Muzahed  and  Taus  said:  If  we 
knew  that  a  certain  man  died  without  making  Haj,  we  did  not  say 
funeral  prayer  for  him.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said:  If  a  man  dies 
without  Haj  and  without  paying  Zakat,  he  will  pray  for  return  to 
the  world.  Then  he  read  this  verse:  O  my  Lord,  send  me  again 
that  I  may  do  good  deeds  which  I  left  undone. 

FIVE  COMPULSORY  DUTIES  OF  HAJ:  To  make  Ihram,  to 
make  Tawaf,  to  make  Sayee,  to  wait  at  Arafat  and  then  to  shave 
hairs.  These  are  also  compulsory  in  Umrah  except  waiting  at 
Arafat. 

SIX  WAJEB  OF  HAJ:  To  make  Ihram  at  the  appointed  place, 
(2)  to  throw  pebbles  at  Mina,  (3)  to  wait  at  Arafat  till  sunset,  (4)  to 
spend  the  night  at  Muzdalafah,  (5)  to  stay  at  Mina,  (6)  and  to 
make  Tawaf  of  the  Ka'ba  at  the  time  of  farewell. 

MODES  OF  HAJ:  Haj  can  be  performed  in  three  modes  -  (1) 
If  rad,  (2)  Qeran  and  (3)  Tamattu.  The  mode  of  making  pilgrimage 
by  Ifrad  is  the  best.  Ifrad  is  a  kind  of  pilgrimage  in  which  Ihram  is 
made  with  the  sole  intention  of  Haj  and  not  Umrah  and  Ihram  is 
broken  after  the  necessary  duties  are  performed.  Then  Ihram  is 
made  for  Umrah.  (2)  In  the  Qeran  Haj,  Ihram  is  made  for  both  Haj 
and  Umrah  at  the  same  time.  (3)  In  Tamattu  Haj,  first  Ihram  is 
made  for  Haj  before  it  actually  takes  place.  Ihram  is  made  at  the 
fixed  place  and  then  the  pilgrim  comes  to  Mecca  and  breaks  it. 
Just  before  Haj,  he  again  makes  Ihram  and  breaks  it  after  Haj  and 
thereafter  makes  Tawaf.  When  there  is  no  Ihram,  everything  can 
be  enjoyed  even  sexual  intercourse  with  wife.  There  are  some 
conditions  in  Tamattu  Haj  -  (1)  not  to  be  included  within  th 
people  of  Ka'ba.  (2)  to  make  Umrah  before  Haj,  (3)  to  make 
Umrah  in  the  months  of  pilgrimage,  (4)  not  to  go  to  a  distance  for 
making  Ihram  for  Haj,  (5)  to  make  Haj  and  Umrah  by  the  same 
person,  it  is  compulsory  for  such  a  pilgrim  to  sacrifice  a  goat.  If  lie 
cannot  do  it,  he  will  fast  before  sacrifice  for  three  days  separately 
or  unitedly  and  when  he  returns  home,  he  will  fast  for  seven  days 
in  the  same  manner. 

PROHIBITED  THINGS  IN  HAJ  AND  UMRAH 

(1)  During  Haj  and  Umrah,  it  is  prohibited  to  put  on  shirt, 
trouser,  sock,  turban.  A  wearing  apparel  without  stitch  and 
sandal  may  be  used.  One  should  not  cover  his  head  as  head  is 
included  within  Ihram.  A  woman  can  wear  stitched  cloth  but  her 


194  SECRETS  OF  PILGRIMAGE  Vol-I 

face  will  remain  uncovered.  (2)  He  shall  not  use  scents  of  any 
kind.  (3)  He  shall  shave  the  hairs  of  head  and  not  manicure  nails. 

(4)  He  shall  not  have  sexual  intercourse  before  the  end  of  Ihram. 

(5)  It  is  unlawful  to  kiss,  embrace  or  to  marry  or  get  married 
during  Ihram.  (6)  It  is  unlawful  to  sacrifice  game  of  land  except 
game  of  sea. 

SECTION  2 

EIGHT  DUTIES  OF  HAJ  FROM  FIRST  TO  LAST 

(1 )  There  are  eight  duties  when  one  comes  out  of  his  house  till 
he  makes  Ihram.  (a)  He  shall  make  Tauba,  pay  compensation  to 
the  oppressed  and  clear  off  his  debts  and  give  expenses  of 
maintenance  for  his  family  members  till  his  return.  He  shall 
return  the  trusts  entrusted  to  him  and  take  legally  earned  money 
sufficient  for  his  journey  expenses  till  his  return  along  with  the 
additional  sum  for  the  poor,  the  destitute  and  the  weak.  He  shall 
spend  something  in  charity  before  he  starts. 

(2)  He  shall  seek  a  religious  companion.  He  will  seek  your 
good  and  help  you.  He  will  remind  you  if  you  forget.  Take 
farewell  from  relatives,  friends  and  neighbours  and  seek  their 
blessings  and  give  your  blessings  to  them  by  saying:  I  am 
entrusting  to  God  your  religion  and  your  trust  and  the  end  of 
your  actions.  The  Prophet  used  to  pray  for  the  man  who  wished 
to  perform' Haj:  May  God  keep  you  in  His  protection.  May  He 
give  you  provision  of  God  fear.  May  He  forgive  your  sins,  and 
may  He  keep  your  face  towards  good  wherever  you  are. 

(3)  Pray  two  rak'ats  of  prayer  before  starting  from  home  with 
Fateha  and  Sura  Kaferun  in  the  first  rak'at  and  Sura  Ikhlas  in  the 
second  rakat.  When  you  finish  your  prayer,  raise  your  two  hands 
and  seek  blessings  with  this  Doa:  O  God,  you  are  my  friend  in  this 
journey,  you  are  my  successor  for  my  properties,  children  and 
friends,  save  me  and  them  from  all  calamities.  O  God,  I  seek  from 
you  in  this  journey  virtues,  God  fear  and  actions  pleasing  to  you. 
O  God,  make  the  world  narrow  for  me,  make  my  journey  easy 
and  give  me  provision  of  health  of  body,  religion  and  safety  of 
properties  and  take  us  for  pilgrimage  of  your  House  and  for 
visiting  the  grave  of  your  Prophet  Muhammad  (P.H).  O  God,  I 
seek  refuge  to  you  from  the  troubles  of  journey,  from  change  of 
conditions  and  from  the  evil  looks  of  the  family  members  and 
friends.  O  God,  give  us  and  them  the  blessings  of  your  nearness. 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  195 

Don't  deprive  us  and  them  of  your  blessing  and  don't  change 
your  kindness  on  us  and  on  them. 

(4)  When  you  will  come  near  the  door  of  your  house,  say:  In 
the  name  of  God,  I  rely  on  God,  there  is  no  power  and  might 
except  in  God.  O  Lord,  I  seek  refuge  to  Thee  that  I  my  not  be 
misguided,  that  I  may  not  misguide  anybody,  that  I  may  not  slip 
or  that  I  may  not  cause  anybody  to  slip,  that  I  may  not  be 
oppressed  or  that  I  may  not  oppress  anybody,  that  nobody  may 
ascribe  ignorance  to  me,  nor  I  may  ascribe  ignorance  to  anybody. 
I  seek  refuge  to  Thee  from  all  these  matters. 

(5)  When  you  get  on  board  of  your  conveyance,  say  in  the 
name  of  God  and  with  God,  God  is  greatest  trust  on  God,  the 
Great,  the  Mighty.  There  is  no  power  and  no  might  except  in  God. 
Whatever  God  wills  comes  into  being.  God  has  made  this 
conveyance  subservient  to  us.  We  shall  have  to  return  to  our 
Lord.  When  you  sit  on  the  conveyance,  recite  seven  times:  All 
praise  is  due  to  God  who  showed  me  path  for  it  We  would  not  have 
found  guidance  if  God  did  not  show  us  guidance.  O  God  Thou  art 
our  carrier  on  backs  and  Thou  art  helper  in  all  our  affairs. 

(6)  Most  of  your  journey  should  be  at  night.  The  Prophet  said: 
You  should  travel  at  night,  as  the  earth  becomes  narrow'at  night 
and  not  at  day.  Sleep  little  during  the  night  that  you'may  be 
helper  in  journey.  When  you  reach  a  high  place,  say:  O  God,  Lord 
of  seven  heavens  and  that  which  casts  shade,  Lord  of  seven 
earths  and  that  which  reduces  it,  Lord  of  the  devil  and  those 
whom  they  misguide,  Lord  of  air  and  on  what  it  blows  upon, 
Lord  of  sea  and  what  it  blows  upon,  I  seek  good  of  the  inhabitants 
of  this  place,  I  seek  refuge  to  Thee  from  their  evils.  When  you 
land  at  any  place,  pray  two  rak'ats. 

(7)  You  should  not  travel  during  day  time.  Don't  walk  alone 
and  don't  go  out  of  your  company  and  keep  a  watch  at  the  time  of 
your  sleep  at  night.  Spread  out  your  hands  if  you  sleep  at  the 
early  part  of  night.  If  you  sleep  by  the  latter  part  of  night,  place 
your  head  on  the  palm  of  your  hand.  Thus  the  Prophet  used  to 
sleep  in  his  journey  in  order  to  guard  against  the  loss  of  a  prayer. 
The  loss  of  a  prayer  is  more  severe  than  the  loss  of  a  pilgrimage. 

(8)  When  you  get  on  a  high  place  on  the  way,  recite  Takbir 
thrice  and  then  recite:  O  God,  Thy  honour  is  above  all  honours, 
Thine  is  all  praise  and  all  glory  when  you  get  down,  recite  Tasbih. 


196  SECRETS  OF  PILGRIMAGE  Vol-I 

DUTIES  FROM  MIQAT  TO  THE  ENTRY 
INTO  MECCA 

(1)  Take  bath  with  the  intention  of  making  Ihram,  comb 
your  hairs  and  head,  manicure  your  nails,  clip  your  mustache 
and  do  everything  as  described  in  the  chapter  on  purity  and 
cleanliness.  (2)  Put  on  two  pieces  of  unsewn  Ihram  cloth. 
White  cloth  is  dearest  to  God.  Use  scent  in  body  and  cloth,  (3). 
Take  journey  if  you  walk  on  foot.  Now  make  niyyat  of  either 
Ifrad,  Qeran  or  Tamattu  Haj  and  say  Talbiyah-present  to  Thee, 
O  God,  present  to  Thee,  there  is  no  partner  for  Thee,  all  praise 
and  gifts  are  for  Thee,  there  is  no  partner  for  Thee.  (4)  When 
you  enter  into  Ihram,  recite  the  following:  O  God,  I  make 
niyyat  for  pilgrimage.  O  God,  make  it  easy  for  me,  help  me  in 
fulfilling  its  duties,  accept  it  from  me.  There  are  other 
invocations  also.  (5)  It  is  commendable  to  recite  Talbiah  in  a 
loud  voice  at  the  time  of  ascending,  descending,  riding  on 
conveyance.  It  is  as  follows:  O  God,  I  am  present  to  Thee,  I  am 
present  to  Thee,  There  is  no  partner  for  Thee.  All  praise,  gifts 
and  lordship  are  for  Thee.  Thou  hast  got  no  partner.  Whenever 
anything  astonished  the  Prophet,  he  used  to  say:  Labbaik,  the 
life  of  the  next  world  is  true  life. 

DUTIES  AFTER  ENTRY  INTO 
MECCA  TILL  TAWAF 

(1)  Take  bath  to  enter  Mecca. 

(2)  When  you  enter  the  first  boundury  of  Harem  outside 
Mecca,  then  recite:  O  God,  this  is  Thy  sacred  sanctuary.  Thy  safe 
place.  So  save  my  blood,  my  hairs  and  my  body  from  Hell.  Save 
me  from  Thy  chastisement  on  the  day  Thou  wilt  resurrect  Thy 
servants  and  include  me  in  the  company  of  Thy  friends  and  those 
subservient  to  Thee. 

(3)  Enter  Mecca  by  the  high  place  of  Mecca  and  come  out  of  it 
by  its  low  place. 

(4)  When  you  enter  Mecca  and  come  near  the  Ka'ba,  recite  the 
following:  There  is  no  deity  but  God.  God  is  greatest.  O  God, 
Thou  art  Peace,  from  Thee  peace,  and  Thou  abode  is  the  abode  of 
peace.  Blessed  art  Thou,  O  possessor  of  glory  and  honour.  O  God, 
this  is  Thy  house.  Thou  hast  made  is  sacred  and  honourable.  So 
increase  its  honour,  respect  and  awe.  O  God,  open  for  me  the 


Vol-1  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  197 

doors  of  Thy  mercy  and  admit  me  in  Thy  Paradise  and  give  me 
refuge  from  the  accursed  devil. 

(5)  When  you  enter  the  Ka'ba,  enter  it  through  the  door  of 
Banu  Shaibah  and  recite:  In  the  name  of  God,  with  God,  from 
God,  towards  God,  in  the  way  of  God  and  upon  the  religion  of 
the  Apostle  of  God.  When  you  will  come  near  the  Ka'ba,  recite: 
O  God,  accept  my  repentance,  forgive  my  faults,  reduce  my 
burden.  All  praise  is  due  to  God  who  has  taken  me  to  His 
sacred  House,  who  has  made  it  the  refuge  of  men  and  their  safe 
place  and  a  guide  to  the  universe.  O  God,  I  am  Thy  servant. 
This  is  Thy  city,  this  is  Thy  sanctuary  and  this  is  Thy  house.  I 
am  present  to  Thee.  I  beseech.  Thy  mercy  and  I  inform  Thee  of 
the  invocation  of  one  afflicted.  I  seek  Thy  forgiveness  and  Thy 
pleasure. 

(6)  Then  touch  the  Black  Stone  by  your  right  hand,  kiss  it  and 
recite:  O  Cod,  I  have  fulfilled  Thy  trust  and  my  promise.  Bear 
witness  of  my  fulfillment. 

FOURTH  DUTY  TAWAF  (Circumbulation)  Observe  seven 
rules  in  Tawaf :- 

(1)  Observe  the  conditions  of  prayer  in  Tawaf.  In  other 
words  be  pure  from  all  sorts  of  uncleanliness  and  cover  your 
private. parts.  Tawaf  is  like  prayer  except  that  conversation  is 
allowed  therein.  It  shall  be  done  with  Ihram  dress  as  prescribed. 
(2)  Then  wait  at  the  Black  Stone  which  is  the  preliminary  point  of 
circling  the  Ka'ba.  (3)  Recite  at  the  start  of  Tawaf:  In  the  name  of 
God,  God  is  greatest.  O  God,  I  began  this  circling  after  putting 
faith  in  Thee,  testifying  to  the  truth  of  Thy  Book,  fulfilling 
promise  with  Thee  and  following  the  ways  of  Thy  Apostle 
Muhammad  (Peace  be  on  him).  After  crossing  the  Black  Stone, 
recite  when  you  reach  the  door  of  the  Ka'ba:  O  God,  this  House 
is  Thine,  this  sanctuary  is  Thine,  this  safe  place  is  Thine  and  this 
place  is  the  place  of  refuge  from  Hell  to  Thee.  Thus  there  are 
recitations  atevery  point  round  the  Ka'ba  as  prescribed  and  you 
will  go  round  the  Ka'ba  seven  times. 

(7)  After  finishing  Tawaf,  pray  two  rak'ats  at  Maqame 
Ibrahim  following  the  Prophet  and  make  invocations.  The 
Prophet  said:  He  who  makes  Tawaf  of  the  Ka'ba  seven  times  and 
then  prays  two  rak'ats  will  get  the  rewards  of  setting  free  a  slave. 


198  SECRETS  OF  PILGRIMAGE  Vol-I 

FIFTH  DUTY-SA'YI: 
(Running  between  Safa  and  Merwa) 

After  finishing  Tawaf,  take  to  running  between  the  two 
hillocks  -  Safa  and  Merwa  seven  times  and  recite  the  following 
before  doing  it:  There  is  no  deity  but  He.  There  is  no  partner  for 
Him.  His  is  the  kingdom  and  His  is  all  praise.  He  giveth  life 
and  taketh  life  and  He  is  eternal  without  death.  All  good  is  in 
His  hands  and  He  is  powerful  over  all  things.  There  is  no  deity 
but  God.  He  is  single.  He  has  proved  true.  His  promise,  helped 
His  servant  and  honoured  His  army  and  routed  the  allies. 
There  is  no  deity  but  God,  being  sincere  to  Him  in  worship 
though  the  polytheists  dislike  it.  Then  at  the  beginning  of 
running,  recite:  O  Lord,  forgive  and  show  mercy  and  pardon 
what  Thou  knowest.  Thou  art  majestic  and  honourable.  O  God, 
our  Lord,  give  us  good  in  this  world  and  good  in  the  hereafter 
and  save  us  from  Hell. 

SIXTH  DUTY-WAITING  AT  ARAFAT 

The  waiting  time  at  Arafat  is  from  noon  of  the  9th  Zil-haj  to 
the  early  dawn  of  the  10th  Zil-Haj.  After  reaching  Mina,  recite 
the  following:  O  God,  this  is  Mina,  bestow  grace  on  me  as  Thou 
hast  bestowed  grace  here  on  Thy  friend  and  those  who  were 
obedient  to  Thee.  Reaching  at  Arafat,  fix  your  tent  and  wait 
there  with  a  great  penitent  mind  and  recite  invocations  and 
supplications  as  much  as  possible  and  seek  forgiveness  and 
mercy  of  God. 

SEVENTH  DUTY  OTHER  INSTITUTIONS  OF  HAJ 

At  sun  rise  the  next  day,  start  from  Arafat  and  reach 
Muzdalafah  and  recite  the  following:  O  God,  this  is  Muzdalafah, 
people  of  different  tongues  have  gathered  here  seeking  different 
necessary  things  from  Thee.  Make  me  one  of  those  who  have 
sought  from  Thee  and  Thou  hast  granted  them.  Then  pray 
Magrib  and  Isha  together  with  one  Azan  and  two  Aqamats.  Stay 
here  for  one  night  as  it  is  included  within  the  institution  of  Haj. 
Next  day,  start  for  Mina  and  reach  the  place  of  stone  throwing 
and  throw  seven  stones  there  as  prescribed.  Then  sacrifice  an 
animal  and  then  shave  your  head.  Then  return  to  Mecca  and 
make  Tawaf  of  the  Ka'ba.  Then  return  to  Mina  again. 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  199 

EIGHTH  AND  NINTH  DUTIES  UMRAH, 
TAWAF  OF  FAREWELL 

He  who  intends  to  make  Umrah  before  or  after  Haj,  let  him 
take  bath,  put  on  Ihram  dress  and  make  Ihram  from  its  appointed 
place.  When  you  enter  Mecca,  go  round  the  Ka'ba  seven  times 
reciting  the  prescribed  invocations  and  run  between  Safa  and 
Merwa.  Then  it  ends  with  the  shaving  cf  head.  After  finishing  all 
rites  of  Haj  and  Umrah,  make  Tawaf  of  the  Ka'ba  seven  times 
before  you  start  for  home  and  seek  forgiveness  from  God  and 
express  gratefulness  for  getting  opportunity  of  making  Haj  and 
Umrah. 

TENTH  DUTY- VISIT  TO  MEDINAH 

The  Prophet  said:  Whose  visits  my  grave  after  my  death  has 
met  me  as  it  were  during  my  life  time.  He  also  said:  He  who  does 
not  visit  me  inspite  of  having  means  oppresses  me.  He  also  said: 
Whose  does  not  come  to  me  except  with  the  object  of  visiting  me, 
it  is  duty  of  God  that  I  become  his  intercessor.  He  also  said:  He 
who  wishes  to  visit  Medinah,  should  send  much  blessings  upon 
the  Prophet  on  his  way  to  Medinah.  When  the  wall  and  trees  of 
Medinah  fall  to  his  eyes,  he  will  recite:  O  God,  this  is  the 
sanctuary  of  Thy  Apostle.  So  make  it  a  shield  for  saving  me  from 
Hell  and  a  safe  place  from  punishment  and  bad  account.  When 
you  enter  Medinah,  recite  the  following:  In  the  name  of  God  and 
upon  the  religion  of  the  Apostle  of  God.  O  Lord,  enter  me  a  true 
entry  and  take  me  out  a  true  taking  out  and  send  for  me  from 
Thee  a  strong  helper.  Then  pray  two  rak'ats  after  entering  the 
mosque  and  then  wait  near  the  face  of  the  Holy  Prophet  and  send 
profuse  Darud  and  blessings  on  him  as  prescribed.  The  Prophet 
said:  The  place  between  my  grave  and  pulpit  is  one  of  the 
gardens  of  paradise  and  my  pulpit  is  upon  my  fountain. 

Then  visit  Jannatul  Baqiy,  the  place  of  burials  of  the  martyrs 
and  of  Hazrats  Osman,  Hasan  Jainal  Abed  in,  Imam  Baquie, 
Imam  Jafar  Sadeq,  Hazrat  Fatema.  Then  observe  prayer  at  the 
Qubba  mosque  as  the  Prophet  said:  He  who  comes  out  of  his 
house  and  comes  to  the  mosque  of  Qubba  and  says  prayer  there, 
the  rewards  of  an  Umrah  are  written  for  him.  The  Prophets  said: 
He  who  can  die  at  Medinah  should  do  it,  as  I  shall  be  an 
intercessor  for  one  who  dies  at  Medinah.  Then  visit  the  grave  of 
the  Prophet  when  leaving  Medinah. 


200  SECRETS  OF  PILGRIMAGE  Vol-I 

SECTION  3 
TEN  SECRET  THINGS  OF  HAJ 

(1)  The  money  for  expense  will  be  lawful.  Hands  will  be  free 
from  trades  and  commerce  and  all  thoughts  will  be  centered 
round  one  God  and  the  mind  will  rest  satisfied  with  the  Zikr  of 
God  and  its  signs.  There  is  in  Hadis:  In  the  latter  days,  the  people 
will  go  for  Haj  but  their  object  will  be  four.  The  rulers  will  go  to 
increase  their  power,  the  rich  for  trade  and  commerce,  the  poor 
for  begging  and  the  learned  for  name  and  fame.  These  things  can 
be  earned  but  if  Haj  is  performed  with  these  objects,  no  reward  is 
acquired  for  Haj.  It  will  go  out  of  the  limit  of  Haj,  specially  when 
one  goes  as  a  representative  for  Haj.  The  Prophet  said:  God  will 
admit  three  persons  in  paradise  for  one  Haj  -  one  who  makes 
death-instruction  of  doing  Haj,  one  who  follows  this  custom  and 
one  who  performs  it  on  behalf  of  his  brother.  God  gives  the  world 
on  account  of  religion  but  He  does  not  give  religion  on  account  of 
the  world.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  makes  Jihad  in  the  way  of 
God  is  like  the  mother  of  Moses.  She  took  remuneration  for 
suckling  her  son.  To  receive  remuneration  for  Haj  by 
representation  in  like  the  receipt  of  remuneration  of  the  mother 
of  Moses  and  there  is  no  fault  in  it,  but  it  will  not  be  legal  to 
perform  Haj  as  an  agent  with  the  object  of  getting  remuneration, 
rather  to  accept  remuneration  with  the  object  of  performing  Haj 
is  legal  as  the  mother  of  Moses  did. 

(2)  Don't  help  the  enemies  of  God  by  keeping  the 
properties  in  trust.  Some  chief  of  Mecca  and  some  Sarcars  of 
Arabia  remain  busy  in  keeping  the  people  away  from  the  path  of 
Haj.  To  entruest  them  with  properties  is  to  help  oppression,  Try 
to  save  yourselves  from  their  hands  and  if  you  are  unable,  it  is 
better  to  return  home  than  to  help  oppressors.  This  is  an 
innovation. 

(3)  Take  sufficient  money  and  provision  with  you  so  that 
you  may  not  feel  difficulty  for  charity.  Take  the  middle  course  for 
expenditure.  Save  yourself  from  taking  delicious  food  and  drink. 
There  is  no  misuse  in  excessive  charity.  There  is  no  good  in 
excessive  expense  and  there  is  no  excessive  expense  in  good 
things.  A  certain  wise  man  said :  To  give  provisions  in  the  path  of 
Haj  is  considered  as  expense  in  the  way  of  God.  Hazrat  Ibn  Omar 
said  :  To  have  good  provision  in  journey  is  honour.  He  used  to 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  201 

say  :  The  best  is  the  pilgrimage  in  which  sincere  intention  is 
perfect,  expense  is  most  pure  and  sure  faith  is  best.  The  Prophet 
said  :  There  is  no  reward  for  an  accepted  Haj  except  paradise.  The 
Prophet  was  asked  :  O  Apostle  of  God,  what  is  an  accepted  Haj? 
He  said  :  The  pilgrimage  in  which  good  words  are  uttered  and 
food  is  given. 

(4)  Give  up  indecent  actions,  evil  actions,  quarrels  and 
disputes.  This  is  the  injunction  of  the  Quran.  Indecent  actions 
mean  indecent  and  useless  talks  including  such  talks  with 
females,  talks  of  intercourse  with  them  as  they  increase  desire  of 
intercourse.  All  things  which  give  encouragement  to  do 
prohibited  things  are  also  prohibited.  Evil  actions  mean  such 
actions  which  take  away  from  the  religion  of  God.  Quarrels  and 
disputes  give  rise  to  hatred  and  envy.  Sufiyan  said :  He  who  talks 
indecent  words  destroys  his  Haj.  Quarrel  is  opposed  to  good 
words  and  the  Prophet  termed  good  words  as  good  deeds  of  Haj. 
Don't  inflict  trouble  on  anybody  and  adopt  good  conduct.  As 
journey  discloses  the  character  and  conduct  of  a  man,  it  is 
therefore  named  Safa. 

(5)  It  is  better  to  perform  Haj  by  walking  on  foot. 
Abdullah-b- Abbas  instructed  his  sons  at  the  time  of  his  death :  O 
my  children,  perform  Haj  by  walking  on  foot,  as  for  each  step  of 
such  a  pilgrim  there  is  written  700  rewards  out  of  the  rewards  of 
Haram.  He  was  questioned :  What  are  the  rewards  of  Haram  ?  He 
said  :  One  good  deed  brings  one  lac  rewards.  It  is  better  to  walk 
from  Mecca  to  Arafat  and  from  Arafat  to  Mina.  A  perfect  Haj  is 
one  in  which  niyat  is  taken  when  one  comes  out  of  his  house  for 
Ihram  and  to  walk  on  foot.  God  says  :  Make  Haj  and  Umrah 
perfect  for  God.  Hazrats  Omar,  Ali  and  Ibn  Masud  explained  His 
verse  in  the  above  way. 

(6)  Don't  ride  without  keeping  the  balance  of  burden  behind 
and  keep  the  things  separate  if  possible.  This  gives  relief  to  the 
camel.  The  Prophet  made  pilgrimage  riding  on  conveyance  and 
even  he  made  Tawaf  riding,  so  that  the  people  might  follow  him 
in  his  action.  The  Prophet  said :  Learn  your  institutions  from  me. 

(7)  Keep  your  countenance  unsmooth,  hairs  dishevelled, 
body  laden  with  dust,  indifferent  to  pride  and  attachment  for  the 
world,  as  the  Prophet  enjoined  his  followers  to  remain  then 
without  beauty  and  with  dishevelled  hairs.  The  Prophet  said  :  A 


202  SECRETS  OF  PILGRIMAGE  Vol-I 

pilgrim  is  dressed  dishevelled  and  his  body  is  dust  laden.  God 
says  :  Look  to  the  visitors  of  My  house.  They  have  come  to  Me 
with  hairs  dishevelled  and  with  body  dust-landen  from  every 
distant  part  of  hills.  God  says  :  Then  perform  the  institutions  of 
Haj.'  This  means  to  shave  hairs,  to  clip  mustaches  and  to 
manicure  nails.  Hazrat  Omar  sent  instructions  to  his  generals  : 
Put  on  old  clothes  and  habituate  yourselves  to  bear  hardships. 

i 

(8)  Show  kindness  to  the  riding  animals  and  don't  take 
anything  on  them  beyond  their  strength.  Sleeping  over  their 
backs  gives  them  trouble  and  gives  a  sense  of  heaviness  to  them. 
The  friends  of  God  did  not  sleep  on  the  backs  of  animals.  The 
Prophet  said  :  Don't  make  the  backs  of  your  animals  seats,  and  to 
descent  from  their  backs  morning  and  evening  is  commendable 
as  it  gives  rest  to  the  animals.  Abu  Darda'a  said  to  his  camel  at  the 
time  of  his  death  :  O  camel,  don't  dispute  with  me  near  your 
Lord,  as  I  did  not  burden  you  with  load  beyond  your  strength. 
Once  a  man  said  to  the  sage  Ibnul  Mobarak  :  I  am  giving  this 
letter  of  mine  with  you.  You  will  take  it  to  the  destination.'  He 
said  :  I  will  ask  the  owner  of  the  camel  about  it,  as  I  took  hire  of 
this  camel.  Thus  he  feared  to  carry  it  on  account  of  God  fear  and 
piety. 

(9)  Seek  nearness  of  God  by  sacrificing  an  animal.  Try  to 
sacrifice  an  animal  which  is  strong  and  strout.  If  sacrifice  is 
compulsory,  don't  eat  its  meat  and  if  optional,  you  may  eat  its 
meat.  God  says  :  'Whose  honour  the  signs  of  God'.  This  is 
explained  by  saying  to  sacrifice  stout  and  strong  animal.  The 
ancient  people  did  not  press  for  price  of  three  things-animals  of 
pilgrimage,  setting  free  of  slaves  and  animals  of  sacrifice,  as  the 
best  of  three  things  is  that  which  is  best  in  price  and  most 
valuable  to  the  seller.  The  object  is  not  the  increase  in  meat  but  to 
purify  from  the  guilt  of  miserliness  and  to  adorn  it  for  God  with 
honour  as  its  flesh  and  blood  will  not  reach  God  but  He  will 
accept  from  you  God  fear.  The  Prophet  was  asked  :  How  is  Haj 
accepted  ?  He  said  :  By  A'z  and  Sa'z.  To  proclaim  Talbiah  loudly 
is  called  A'z  and  to  sacrifice  a  camel  is  called  Sa'z.  The  Prophet 
said  :  Nothing  is  dearer  to  God  on  the  day  of  sacrifice  out  of  the 
actions  of  men  than  the  sacrifice  of  an  animal.  It  will  come  on  the 
Resurrection  Day  with  its  hoof  and  horns  and  its  blood  falls  in  a 
place  near  God  before  it  falls  on  the  ground.  So  purify  your  soul 
by  sacrifice.  There  is  in  Hadis  :  There  is  reward  for  every  hair  of 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  203 

the  sacrificed  animal  and  for  every  drop  of  blood  and  it  will  be 
weighed  near  God.  So  give  good  news.  The  Prophet  said  : 
Sacrifice  a  good  animal,  as  it  will  be  your  carrier  on  the 
Resurrection  Day. 

(1)  To  spend  with  a  cheerful  mind.  Bear  with  Pleasure 
sacrifice  of  the  loss  that  is  caused  in  the  matter  of  properties  or 
the  occurrence  of  any  calamity,  because  it  is  a  proof  of  the 
acceptance  of  Haj.  The  troubles  and  calamities  on  the  way  to 
pilgrimage  is  like  expense  in  the  way  of  God  and  the  expense  of  a 
dirham  at  that  time  is  equal  to  the  expense  of  seven  hundred 
dirhams.  That  is  the  reward  of  bearing  hardships  in  the  way  of 
Jihad.  Nothing  is  spoiled  near  God  of  any  trouble  which  is 
foreborn  and  every  loss  which  is  sustained.  It  is  said  that  if  one 
gives  up  sins  and  bad  company  and  takes  up  good  company  and 
gives  up  assembly  of  useless  talks  and  takes  to  the  assemblies  of 
Zikr,  they  are  the  signs  of  acceptance  of  Haj. 

SIGNIFICANCE  OF  INTERNAL  ACTIONS  OF  HAJ 

KNOWLEDGE:  The  first  thing  of  Haj  is  to  know 
everything  in  connection  with  Haj.  Know.  O  dear  readers,  that 
you  will  not  be  able  to  reach  God  till  you  can  control  your 
passions  and  low  desires,  restrain  yourself  from  all 
enjoyments  and  pleasure,  make  short  your  necessities  and 
work  only  for  the  sake  of  God.  For  this  reason,  the  friends  of 
God  of  yore  used  to  live  far  away  from  the  localities  of  men 
and  lived  in  lonely  places  in  caves  of  mountains  and  hills,  so 
that  their  lovetfor  God  might  be  deep.  God  says  about  them  in 
the  Quran  :  Because  there  are  hermits  and  those  who 
renounced  the  work  among  them  and  they  are  not  proud. 
When  they  began  to  live  contrary  to  it  and  gave  up  loneliness 
for  divine  service  and  mixed  with  the  people  to  fulfill  their  low 
desires,  God  sent  the  Apostle  Muhammad  (P.  H.)  to  reawaken 
the  paths  of  the  next  world  and  to  call  them  to  the  aways  of  the 
Prophets.  On  being  questioned  by  the  religious  people  about 
the  life  of  a  hermit,  the  Prophet  said  :  God  gave  us  in  lieu 
thereof  Jihad  and  Takbir  in  every  elevated  place  (Haj).  The 
Prophet  said  :  God  gave  this  gift  for  this  people  and  made  Haj 
as  their  monkery,  honoured  the  ancient  House  as  His  House 
fixed  it  as  the  object  of  desire  of  the  people,  made  its 
surrounding  place  pure  to  show  honour  to  the  House,  made 
Arafat  an  opening  space  as  the  precincts  of  His  House  and 


204  SECRETS  OF  PILGRIMAGE  Vol-I 

honoured  the  place  by  prohibiting  hunting  and  cutting  off  trees 
therein.  He madeitas  the Darbar of  the  greatest  Emperor.  Every 
visitor  comes  to  the  Darbar  from  every  distant  and  inaccessible 
place  dishevelled  in  hairs  and  laden  with  dust  and  in  the  most 
humble  spirit.  He  knows  that  no  house  can  encompass  God 
and  no  town  can  cover  him  and  yet  he  does  it  to  make  his 
divine  service  and  his  allegiance  and  obedience  perfect.  For 
this  reason,  throwing  of  stones  at  Mina,  running  between  Safa 
and  Merwa  and  other  institutions  do  not  come  within 
understading  or  seem  good.  But  by  these  acts,  full  servitude  is 
expressed,  The  object  of  the  payment  of  Zakat  is  understood. 
The  object  of  fasting  to  restrain  sexual  passion  and  low  desires 
is  understood.  The  object  of  prayer  is  also  understood.  But  no 
satisfactory  reason  is  ostensibly  found  in  the  throwing  of 
stones,  running  between  Safa  and  Merwa,  nor  they  come 
within  understanding.  It  is  however  true  that  true  servitude  is 
a  separate  thing  and  to  serve  God  means  that  one  should 
conduct  himself  according  to  the  order  of  God,  whether  it 
contains  any  meaning  or  not.  The  object  of  obeying  orders  is 
nothing  but  to  serve  God.  It  is  an  act  of  wisdom  to  obey  God  in 
places  where  intellect  cannot  enter  and  which  it  cannot 
comprehend.  Servitude  to  God  is  expressed  fully  when  you 
understand  a  thing  or  not.  For  this  reason,  The  Prophet  said 
regarding  Haj :  I  consider  Haj  thus  a  veritable  truth,  servitude 
in  reality  and  slavery  of  the  highest  order.  He  did  not  say  this 
with  regard  to  prayer  and  other  divine  services.  So  the 
institutions  which  cannot  be  understood  by  intellect  are  the 
perfect  divine  services  for  making  the  heart  pure,  because  to 
act  contrary  to  nature  and  to  return  from  habits  is  the  real 
servitude  and  slavery. 

DESIRE  FOR  HAJ:  The  Ka'ba  is  the  House  of  God.  The 
meaning  of  coming  to  it  is  to  see  God  there.  He  who  desires  to 
visit  the  Ka'ba  in  the  world  should  have  his  object  not  to  be 
deprived  of  it.  His  object  should  be  his  look  to  the  countenance  of 
God  in  His  permanent  abode.  This  earthly  eye  has  got  no  power 
to  have  a  glimpse  of  the  Divine  light,  nor  can  it  bear  the  brilliance 
of  His  light.  The  light  of  eye  in  the  next  world  will  be  permanent 
and  will  be  free  from  the  causes  of  destruction  and  change  and 
then  it  will  be  of  for  glimpse  of  the  Lord.  But  one  can  be  fit  to  earn 
it  by  not  visiting  His  House.  So  desire  to  meet  Him  will  lead  you 
to  the  causes  of  visit  without  doubt 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  205 

FIRM  DETERMINATION  OF  MAKING  HAJ 

Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  you  will  intend  to  be  separate 
from  your  home  and  family  by  the  help  of  your  firm 
determination  and  turn  your  face  towards  visiting  the  House 
after  giving  up  comforts  and  pleasures  of  home  life.  Know  in 
your  mind  the  honour  of  the  Ka'ba  and  the  exalted  rank  of  its 
Owner.  Make  your  firm  determination  only  for  God,  keep  distant 
from  name  and  fame  and  make  your  intention  sincere  and  pure. 

TO  CUT  OFF  TIE  IN  HAJ:  It  means  to  pay  compensation  to 
the  oppressed  and  to  make  sincere  repentance  to  God  from  all 
sins.  Every  oppression  has  got  a  compensation  and  every 
compensation  is  due  to  somebody.  Don't  hope  to  return  home 
and  make  wasiat  to  your  children  in  writing  and  think  of  this 
journey  as  the  journey  for  the  next  world. 

PROVISIONS  OF  JOURNEY:  Seek  provision  from  your 
lawful  earnings  and  think  that  your  good  deeds  are  the 
provisions  of  your  next  world  and  these  will  go  with  you  after 
your  death.  Regarding  conveyance.  Be  grateful  to  God  that  you 
have  got  a  conveyance  to  carry  you  and  your  loads.  Remember 
that  you  are  visiting  a  funeral  prayer  in  the  journey  towards  the 
next  world.  The  affairs  of  Haj  are  like  journey  to  the  next  world. 
Ihram  cloth  When  you  put  it  on.  remember  the  coffin  cloth  with 
which  you  will  be  clothed.  As  you  wear  tow  unsewn  pieces  of 
cloth  to  go  near  the  House  of  God  and  change  your  habit  of 
putting  on  fine  clothes,  so  you  will  not  be  able  to  meet  with  God 
after  your  death  unless  you  take  clothes  contrary  to  the  clothes  of 
this  world.  As  there  is  no  stitching  of  cotton  cloth  for  burial,  so 
there  is  no  stitching  of  Ihram  cloth. 

STARTING  FROM  HOME:  When  you  come  out  of  your 
home,  know  that  you  are  going  on  a  journey  to  God  after 
separating  your  family  and  friends.  Think  then  in  your  mind 
what  is  your  object,  to  whom  are  you  going,  to  meet  whom  do 
you  hope  ?  You  are  going  to  meet  the  greatest  emperor  and  for 
that  you  have  surrendered  and  you  have  responded  to  it.  Bring 
this  consolation  in  mind  that  if  you  visit  the  Ka'ba  you  may  get 
glimpse  of  its  Owner.  This  is  your  last  object  and  it  will  help  you 
towards  that  object.  Hope  in  mind  to  reach  the  Ka'ba  and  that 
your  Haj  may  be  accepted,  Don't  depend  on  your  good  deeds  and 
believe  firmly  in  the  mercy  of  God.  If  you  cannot  reach  the  Ka'ba 


206  SECRETS  OF  PILGRIMAGE  Vol-I 

and  die  on  the  way,  it  will  help  to  meet  Him  being  His  guest  as 
God  says :  If  a  man  goes  out  of  his  house  and  makes  emigration  to 
God  and  His  Apostle  and  then  death  overtakes  him,  his  reward  is 
upon  God  4:100Q.  When  you  reach  the  Miqat  or  the  fixed  place 
for  Ihram,  remember  all  the  great  events  when  you  will  leave  the 
world  up  to  the  Resurrcetion  Day.  When  you  remember  the 
danger  of  crossing  the  way,  remember  then  the  questions  of 
Munkar  and  Naqir.  If  you  see  the  ferocious  beasts  on  the  way, 
remember  the  biting  of  snakes  in  graves. 

TALBIAH  AT  MIQAT:  Know  that  Talbiah  means  to  respond 
to  the  call  of  God.  Remember  Him  between  hope  and  fear  and 
depend  on  the  mercy  of  God.  Imam  Sufiyan  Saori  said  that  Imam 
Jainal  Abedin  son  of  Hazrat  Hussain  made  pilgrimage.  When  he 
made  Ihram,  his  face  became  changed  and  he  had  no  strength  to 
say  Labbaik.  He  was  asked  :  Why  are  you  not  uttering  Labbaik  ? 
He  said  :  I  fear  lest  I  may  be  said  :  You  have  no  Labbaik  and 
fortune,  When  he  uttered  Labbaik,  he  suddenly  fell  in  swoon  and 
remained  long  in  that  condition.  As  a  result,  he  could  not  wait  at 
Arafat.  Abu  Solaiman  Darani  did  not  utter  Labbaik  even  after 
walking  a  mile.  Then  he  fell  down  senseles.  When  he  recoverd 
from  his  swoon,  he  said  :  O  Ahmad,  woe  to  you,  i  fear  lest  I  may 
be  said  :  There  is  no  Labbaik  and  fortune  for  you.  Remember  at 
the  time  when  you  utter  Labbaik  the  condition  of  the  people  on 
the  day  of  congregation. 

ENTRY  INTO  MECCA:  Remember  at  the  time  when  you 
enter  Mecca  that  you  have  reached  safely  in  the  sacred  place  of 
God  and  hope  from  God  that  you  will  be  safe  from  punishment 
on  account  of  your  entry  into  Mecca.  When  you  look  at  the  Ka'ba 
remember  its  glory  and  hope  to  meet  its  Owner.  Tawaf  of  Ka'ba 's 
like  prayer.  Remember  then  that  your  Tawaf  is  like  the  Tawaf  of 
the  near  angles  who  are  making  round  the  Throne.  Don't  think 
that  the  object  of  your  Tawaf  is  the  Tawaf  of  your  body  round  the 
House  but  its  object  is  the  Tawaf  of  your  mind  with  the 
rememberance  of  God.  Know  that  an  honourable  Tawaf  is  the 
Tawaf  of  mind  before  God.  The  Ka'ba  is  the  outward  darbar  of  a 
king.  He  who  is  not  seen  by  external  eye  appears  there.  Soul  is  a 
thing  of  the  spiritual  world  as  body  is  of  the  material  world.  God 
is  in  the  unseen  world.  This  visible  world  leads  to  the  world 
unseen.  This  is  for  those  for  whom  God  opened  this  door.  Think 
that  the  Ka'ba  is  the  exact  prototype  of  the  Baitul  Mamur  in 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  207 

heaven.  The  angles  make  Tawaf  of  Baitul  Mamur  and  the  people 
oftheKa'ba. 

KISSING:  When  you  kiss  the  Black  Stone,  think  that  it  is  a 
sign  of  allegiance  and  kiss  His  hand.  Be  firm  in  your  will  that  you 
are  fulfilling  your  promise.  The  Prophet  said  :  The  Black  stone  is 
the  right  hand  of  God  in  the  World.  As  a  man  handshakes  with 
his  brother,  so  God  also  handshakes  with  the  people  by  means  of 
the  Black  Stone. 

SAYI  BETWEEN  SAFA  AND  MERWA:  Sayi  between  these 
two  hillocks  in  expectation  of  getting  His  glimpse  is  just  as  a  mna 
goes  forward  and  backward  in  getting  a  glimpse  of  his  emperor. 
Think  that  Safa  is  the  scale  of  good  deeds  and  Merwa  of  bad 
deeds.  By  running  between  these  two  hillocks,  think  which  of  the 
scales  becomes  heavy.  The  wait  in  Arafat  After  seeing  the  vast 
concourse  of  people  of  different  climes  and  tongues,  you  will 
remember  the  case  of  the  great  congregation  on  the  Resurrection 
Day  that  each  people  will  gather  there  with  their  respective 
Prophet  and  each  people  will  except  intercession  of  their  Prophet 
and  remain  busy  to  know  whether  his  intercesion  was  accepted 
or  not.  When  you  will  remember  this,  keep  your  mind  engaged  in 
the  rememberance  of  God.  Throwing  of  stones.  Obey  God's 
command  by  throwing  stones  and  show  sincerely  and  honestly 
your  servitude  to  God  even  though  it  does  not  come  to  your 
understanding,  because  blind  obedience  of  a  slave  to  his  master 
gains  the  love  of  the  master.  Then  intend  to  follow  the  deeds  of 
Abraham  who  drove  away  the  devil  by  throwing  stones  at  him 
when  the  latter  wanted  to  misguide  him  and  not  to  sacrifice  his 
dearest  son  Ismail  in  obedience  to  God's  command.  The  meaning 
of  Haj  is  to  obey  God's  commands  without  argument  and 
without  exercising  intellect. 

SACRIFICE  OF  ANIMAL:  Sacrifice  in  a  mass  scale  brings 
the  people  near  God.  For  this  reason,  the  animal  for  sacrifice 
should  be  stout  and  strong.  Hope  that  in  lieu  of  every  limb  of  the 
sacrificed  animal,  God  will  save  your  every  limb  from  Hell-fire. 
The  more  it  is  stout  and  strong,  the  more  you  will  be  free  from 
Hell-fire. 

VISITING  MEDINAH:  When  your  sight  will  fall  on  the  wall 
of  the  city  of  Medinah,  remember  that  God  selected  this  city  for 
His  Prophet  and  took  him  there.  This  is  the  place  of  the 


208  SECRETS  OF  PILGRIMAGE  Vol-I 

promulgation  of  God's  compulsory  ordinanace  and  the  ways  of 
the  Prophet.  He  fought  with  the  enemies  here  and  preached 
Islam  up  to  his  death.  God  established  the  religion  through  the 
successors  of  the  Prophet.  Then  think  of  the  foot-steps  of  the 
Prophet  in  the  city  and  take  steps  with  care  and  honour.  The 
Prophet  said:  God  will  present  before  me  many  people.  They  will 
say:  O  Muhammad,  O  Muhammad.  I  will  say:  O  Lord,  they  are 
my  companions.  He  will  say:  You  don't  know  what  evil  deeds 
they  have  done  after  you?  I  will  say:  Then  be  off  from  me."  If  you 
have  not  followed  the  Prophet,  you  will  be  far  away  from  him; 
still  you  will  hope  for  the  mercy  of  God.  When  you  will  reach  the 
mosque,  remember  that  God  selected  the  place  for  the  Prophet 
and  the  earliest  Muslims.  Enter  it  in  fear  and  hope.  When  Wais 
Qarni  entered  the  mosque  of  Medina  and  began  to  wait  at  the 
door,  he  said:  This  is  the  grave  of  the  Holy  Prophet.  At  once  he 
fell  in  swoon.  When  he  regained  his  senses,  he  said:  Take  me  out 
of  this.  I  have  got  no  taste  in  the  place  where  the  Prophet  has  been 
buried. 

MEETING  WITH  THE  PROPHET:  Meet  with  him  as  if  he  is 
alive  and  that  you  are  standing  before  him.  Don't  go  very  near  his 
grave  as  you  would  not  have  gone  to  him  if  he  were  alive.  Don't 
touch  his  grave  and  don't  kiss  it  and  know  that  God  knows  your 
mind,  your  standing  and  your  salutation.  The  Prophet  said:  God 
appointed  an  angel  in  his  grave.  Whose  sends  salam  to  him  out  of 
his  followers  he  will  take  it  to  him.  This  has  been  said  with  regard 
to  that  person  who  will  not  be  present  before  his  grave.  How  will 
it  be  in  case  of  that  man  who  left  his  home  and  family  and 
relatives  and  journeyed  in  difficult  places  and  hills  and  came  to, 
visit  the  Prophet?  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  sends  one  Darud  on 
me,  God  will  send  ten  Daruds  on  him.  Then  come  to  the  pulpit  of 
the  Apostle  of  God  and  think  of  his  standing  thereon  and  his 
sermons  to  his  followers.  When  it  will  be  finished,  think  whether 
your  Haj  has  been  accepted  or  not  as  He  does  not  accept  Haj  of 
one  whom  He  does  not  love. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

RECITATION  OF  THE  QURAN 

All  praise  is  due  to  God  who  showered  blessings  on  His 
servants  by  sending  revealed  books  and  Prophets.  This  Quran 
does  not  contain  any  false  stories  of  yore  or  future.  It  is  a 
revelation  from  the  Most  High,  the  Almighty.  Therein  there  is 
food  for  reflection  for  those  who  are  thoughful  and  there  is  true 
stories  of  former  nations.  By  its  help,  walk  on  straight  path 
becomes  easy  as  the  commands  and  prohibitions  were  expressed 
there  in  clear  terms  and  the  lawful  and  unlawful  things  made 
clear.  It  is  a  light  and  therein  there  is  cure  of  the  diseases  of  mind. 
God  destroyed  those  who  opposed  it.  God  misguides  one  who 
seeks  knowledge  other  than  that  of  the  Quran.  It  is  a  firm  rope  of 
God,  clear  light  and  firmest  tie.  There  is  everything  in  it,  small 
and  great.  There  is  no  end  of  its  miracle.  It  is  ever  fresh  and  new 
to  the  reciters.  It  is  a  guide  for  the  past  and  future.  The  Jinn  heard 
it  and  warned  their  classes.  They  said:  We  heard  a  wonderful 
Quran.  It  is  a  guide.  We  believe  in  it  and  did  not  set  up  anything 
with  our  Lord.  Those  who  advised  according  to  it  told  truth. 
Those  who  held  it  firm,  found  guidance.  Those  who  acted  up  to  it 
got  salvation.  God  says:  I  have  revealed  it  and  I  will  certainly 
preserve  it.  The  modes  of  preserving  the  Quran  are  the  following 
committing  it  to  memory,  writting  it  in  papers,  to  recite  it  always, 
to  read  it  in  prayer,  to  explain  it  and  comment  on  it.  It  will  be 
discussed  in  four  sections. 

SECTION  1 

EXCELLENCE  OF  THE  QURAN 

The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  thinks  that  what  has  been  given  to 
others  is  better  than  it  considered  little  the  dearest  thing  of  God. 
He  said:  Prophets,  angels,  or  anybody  else  cannot  be  better 
intercessors  in  rank  than  the  Quran.  He  said:  If  the  Quran  is  kept 
within  skin,  burning  fire  will  not  go  near  t,  nor  touch  it.  The 
Prophet  said:  Recitation  of  the  Quran  is  the  best  divine  service  of 
my  followers.  He  said:  God  recited  chapter  Toaha  and  Easin  one 
thousand  years  before  creation.  When  the  angels  heard  them, 
they  said:  How  fortunate  are  they  on  whom  they  will  be  revealed. 
How  fortunate  are  those  who  commit  them  to  memory.  How 


210  RECITATION  OF  THE  QURAN  Vol-I 

fortunate  are  the  tongues  which  broadcast  them.  The  Prophet 
said:  The  best  of  you  is  he  who  learns  the  Quran  and  teaches  it. 
He  said:  God  says:  If  a  man  cannot  pray  or  invoke  Me  on  account 
of  his  being  engaged  in  Teciting  the  Quran,  I  will  give  him  better 
rewards  than  those  who  express  gratefulness.  He  said:  Two 
persons  will  stand  in  the  mountain  of  musk  on  the  Resurrection 
Day.  They  will  have  no  fear  and  will  render  ho  accounts,  even 
they  will  be  free  from  the  wants  of  men  -  (1)  He  who  recites  the 
Quran  for  pleasure  of  God,  (2)  He  who  becomes  the  leader  of  a 
people  who  remain  satisfied  with  him.  The  Prophet  said:  A 
reciter  of  the  Quran  belongs  to  the  family  of  God  and  is  His 
sincere  servant.  He  said:  Rust  falls  on  heart  as  it  falls  on  iron.  The 
Prophet  was  asked:  O  Messenger  of  God,  how  can  the  rust  be 
removed?  He  said:  By  reciting  the  Quran  and  by  remembering 
death.  The  Prophet  said:  God  hears  the  recitation  of  the  Quran 
more  attentively  than  themasterof  a  singing  girl. 

Wise  saying:  Hazrat  Abu  Omarah  Baheli  said:  Recite  the 
Quran.  This  hanging  book  will  not  deceive  you.  God  will  not 
punish  one  who  commits  it  to  memory.  Hazrat  Ibn  Masud  said: 
When  you  wish  to  acquire  knowledge  select  the  Quran  as  it  is  the 
embodiment  of  the  knowledge  of  the  previous  and  future 
generations.  He  said  quoting  the  saying  of  the  Prophet:  You  will 
get  ten  rewards  in  lieu  of  each  word  of  it.  Beware,  I  am  not  saying 
that  'Alef,  Lam  and  Mim'  is  a  word  but  Alef  is  a  word,  Lam  is  a 
word  and  Mim  is  a  word.  He  said:  Let  nobody  among  you  ask 
anything  about  himself  except  the  Quran.  If  he  loves  the  Quran 
and  remains  satisfied  with  it,  he  loves  God  and  His  Prophet  and  if 
he  disrespects  the  Quran,  he  disrespects  God  and  His  Prophet. 
Hazfat  Amr-b-A's  said:  Every  verse  of  the  Quran  is  a  door  of 
Paradise  and  a  light  in  your  house.  He  said:  He  who  recites  the 
Quran  opens  as  it  were  the  door  of  Prophethood  by  his  two  sides, 
but  no  revelation  will  come  to  him.  Hazrat  Abu  Hurairah  said: 
The  provision  of  the  inmates  of  a  house  in  which  the  Quran  is 
recited  increases,  their  good  becomes  more,  angels  remain 
present  'here  and  the  devil  goes  out  of  it.  The  provision  of  the 
inmates  of  a  house  in  which  the  Quran  is  not  recited  becomes 
straitened,  their  welfare  diminishes,  angels  go  out  of  it  and  the 
devil  comes  in.  Imam  Ahmad-b-Hambal  said:  I  saw  God  in 
dream  and  asked  him:  O  God,  for  what  thing  one  can  come  near 
to  Thee!  He  said:  O  Ahmad,  by  means  of  My  Kalam  the  Quran.  I 
asked  Him:  O  Lord,  by  means  of  its  understanding  >r  not?  He 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  WORSHIP  211 

said:  Yes,  whether  you  understand  its  meaning  or  not. 
Fazil-b-Yeaz  said:  One  who  commits  the  Quran  by  heart  is  the 
bearer  of  the  standard  of  Islam.  He  should  not  hold  useless  talks 
with  those  who  hold  such  talks.  He  should  not  forget  the  Quran 
as  others  do.  Imam  Sufiyan  Saori  said:  When  a  man  recites  the 
Quran,  an  angel  kisses  on  his  forehead.  Amr-b-Maimum  said:  If  a 
man  reads  one  hundred  verses  of  the  Quran  after  morning 
prayer,  God  will  give  him  rewards  of  the  actions  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  world.  Once  Khalid-b-Oqbah  came  to  the 
Prophet  and  said:  Read  out  to  me  the  Quran.  He  read  out  to  him: 
God  enjoins  you  to  do  justice  and  good.  He  said  to  the  Prophet: 
Recite  again.  He  read  it  again  and  then  said:  By  God,  therein  there 
is  sweetness,  heightness,  its  lower  portion  has  got  bases,  its 
upper  has  got  fruits  and  it  is  not  the  words  of  a  man.  Hazrat 
Hasan  Basri  said:  By  God,  there  is  no  greater  wealth  than  the 
Quran  and  there  is  no  want  after  the  Quran.  Fuzail  said:  If  a  man 
recites  the  last  portion  of  chapter  Hashr  and  dies  on  that  day,  the 
seal  of  martyrdom  is  imprinted  on  him.  If  he  reads  it  in  the 
evening  and  dies  in  that  night,  the  seal  of  martyrdom  is 
imprinted  on  him.  Hazrat  AH  said:  Three  things  increase  the 
power  of  memory  and  removes  scum,  tooth-  stick,  fast  and 
recitation  of  the  Quran. 

PUNISHMENT  FOR  HEEDLESS  RECITATION 

Hazrat  Anas  said:  There  are  some  men  who  recite  the  Quran, 

but them.  Abu  Solaiman  Darani  said:  The  angels  of  Hell 

will  arrest  those  who  commit  the  Quran  to  memory  but  become 
disobedient  to  God.  Hazrat  Ibn  Masud  said:  Those  who 
committed  the  Quran  to  memory  should  get  acquainted  with  the 
night  when  the  people  remain  asleep  and  should  be  sorry  when 
the  people  commit  sins  and  make  enjoyments  during  day  time. 
They  will  weep  when  the  people  will  laugh,  they  will  remain 
silent  when  the  people  will  hold  useless  talks.  The  Prophet  said: 
Recite  the  Quran  till  it  prohibits  you  to  do  evil  deeds.  If  it  does  not 
prohibit  you,  it  will  not  be  considered  as  your  recitation.  The 
.  Prophet  said:  He  who  knows  the  unlawful  things  of  the  Quran  as 
lawful  does  not  believe  in  the  Quran.  Hazrat  Ibn  Masud  said:  The 
Quran  was  revealed  to  you  for  doing  actions.  So  translate  your 
recitation  into  action.  There  are  men  among  you  who  recite  the 
Quran  from  first  to  last  and  do  not  omit  a  single  word  therefrom 
but  they  donot  translate  it  into  action.  There  is  in  the  Torah:  God 


212  RECITATION  OF  THE  QURAN  Vol-I 

said:  O  My  servant,  are  you  not  ashamed  of  Me?  If  a  letter  from 
your  friend  comes  to  you  in  your  journey,  you  at  once  come  toa 
side  of  the  road  and  read  with  an  attentive  mind  every  word  and 
sentence  of  it  and  you  do  not  omit  anything  from  it.  but  I  sent  My 
Book  to  you  and  I  am  seeing  with  what  attentive  mind  you  are 
reading  it  and  how  you  have  followed  its  commands  and 
prohibitions.  But  you  have  turned  your  face  from  it.  O  My 
servant,  have  you  considered  it  more  mean  than  your  friend's 
letter?  I  am  present  to  you.  I  am  speaking  with  you  but  you  have 
turned  your  mind  from  Me.  Have  I  become  more  mean  to  you 
than  your  friend? 


SECTION  2 
EXTERNAL  RULES  OF  RECITING  THE  QURAN 

There  are  ten  external  rules  for  the  recitation  of  the  Quran. 

(1)  After  ablution,  face  the  Ka'ba  without  showing  pride  in 
sitting  with  head  downwards  just  like  the  sitting  of  a  student 
before  his  teacher.  The  best  way  of  Quran  reading  is  in  prayer 
standing  in  a  mosque.  God  says:  They  remember  God  standing, 
sitting  and  lying  on  their  sides  and  ponder  over  the  creations  of 
the  heaven  and  earth.  In  this  verse,  every  condition  has  been  said 
in  order  of  excellence-first  standing,  then  sitting  and  then  lying 
state.  Hazrat  Ali  said:  If  a  man  recites  a  portion  of  the  Quran  in 
prayer  standing,  one  hundred  rewards  are  written  for  him  for 
every  word.  If  a  man  recites  a  portion  of  the  Quran  sitting  in 
prayer,  fifty  rewards  are  written  for  him  for  every  word.  If  a  man 
reads  the  Quran  outside  the  prayer  with  ablution,  twenty  five 
rewards  are  written  for  him  for  every  word.  If  a  man  reads  the 
Quran  without  ablution,  ten  rewards  are  written  for  him  for 
every  word.  Hazrat  Abu  Zarr  Geffari  said:  To  make  much 
prostration  at  day  time  and  to  pray  long  at  night  are  better. 

(2)  THE  QUANTITY  OF  QURAN  RECITING:  There  are 
different  rules  for  the  readers  about  the  quantity  of  the 
recitations  of  the  Quran.  Some  finish  the  whole  Quran  in  a  day 
and  a  night,  some  twice,  some  thrice  and  some  once  in  a  month. 
The  best  way  is  what  the  Prophet  said  in  this  Hadis:  He  who 
finishes  the  Quran  within  less  time  than  three  days  cannot  gain 
the  knowledge  of  the  rules  of  religion  as  hasty  reading  cannot 
clearly  be  recited.  Hazrat  Ayesha  said  of  a  man  who  recited  the 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  WORSHIP  213 

Quran  hastily:  This  man  neither  recites  the  Quran,  nor  remains 
silent.  The  Prophet  ordered  Abdullah-b-Amr  to  finish  the  Quran 
once  a  week.  Some  of  the  companions  followed  this  rule.  They 
were  Hzrats  Osman,  Zaid-  b-Sabet,  Ibn  Masud,  Obai-b-Ka'ab  and 
others.  So  there  are  several  modes  of  finishing  the  Quran,  (1)  once 
in  a  day  and  a  night,  (2)  once  in  a  month,  (3)  once  in  a  week  with 
seven  equal  portions  a  day. 

The  Quran  was  first  free  from  I'rab  or  dots  above  and  below. 
Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  There  is  no  harm  in  giving  I'rab  to  the 
Quran.  It  is  commendable  to  read  the  Quran  slowly.  The  object  of 
the  Quran  reading  is  to  ponder  and  there  are  fixed  places  therein 
for  slow-reading.  The  Prophet  explained  every  word  and  every 
sentence  separately.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said:  I  prefer  to  read 
chapter  Baqr  and  chapter  Imran  slowly  and  to  ponder  about 
them  than  to  read  them  hurriedly. 

Weeping  at  the  time  of  recitation  of  the  Quran  is  also 
commendable,  as  the  Prophet  said:  Recite  the  Quran  and  weep.  If 
you  cannot  weep,  assume  weeping  attitude.  The  Prophet  said: 
He  who  does  not  read  the  Quran  with  sweet  tone  is  not  of  us. 
Saleh  Marbi  said:  I  recited  the  Quran  in  dream  before  the 
Prophet.  He  said:  O  Saleh,  where  is  your  weeping  in  reciting  the 
Quran?  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said:  When  you  read  the  verse  of 
prostration,  don't  prostrate  soon  till  you  weep.  If  the  eyes  of  any 
one  of  you  do  not  shed  bears,  let  him  weep  by  his  heart.  The  mode 
of  weeping  by  force  is  to  bring  sorrows  to  the  mind.  He  who  can 
bring  sorrows  to  the  mind  can  also  bring  weeping.  The  Prophet 
said:  The  Quran  has  been  revealed  for  sorrow.  When  you  read  it, 
be  in  a  sorrowful  mode.  The  mode  of  bringing  sorrow  is  to 
ponder  over  the  words  of  warnings  and  punishments  in  the 
Quran.  Fulfil  your  duty  to  every  verse.  If  you  read  the  verse  of 
prostration,  prostrate.  If  you  hear  the  verse,  from  another,  make 
prostration  but  do  it  not  without  ablution.  There  are  fourteen 
prostrations  in  the  Quran.  Prostration  is  perfect  when  Takbir  is 
recited  therein.  God  says:  Fall  down  in  prostration  and  glorify 
the  praise  of  your  Lord.  There  are  conditions  of  prostration  like 
the  conditions  of  prayer  to  cover  private  parts,  to  face  the  Ka'ba, 
to  have  the  body  and  cloth  pure.  Recite  Takbir  for  prostration, 
then  fall  in  prostration,  then  raise  up  your  head  with  Takbir  and 
then  return  salam.  A  follower  will  follow  the  leader  in 
prostration  without  reciting  the  Quran. 


214  RECITATION  OF  THE  QURAN  Vol-I 

When  you  begin  to  recite  the  Quran,  recite:  I  seek  refuge  to 
God  from  the  accursed  devil.  Then  recite  chapter  Nas  and 
Fateha.  When  you  finish  the  Quran,  say:  O  God,  show  mercy 
on  me  for  the  Quran,  make  it  for  me  a  guide,  a  light,  a  leader 
and  a  mercy.  O  God,  remind  me  what  I  have  forgotten 
therefrom,  teach  me  what  I  do  not  know  therefrom,  and  give 
me  provision  of  reading  it  day  and  night  and  make  it  a  proof 
for  me.  O  Lord  of  the  universe. 

TO  RECITE  THE  QURAN  WITH  SOUND:  Recite  the  Quran 
with  such  sound  as  you  may  hear  it.  The  meaning  of  reciting  is 
that  you  will  hear  yourself  what  is  recited.  Read  it  with  such 
sound  in  prayer  as  you  yourself  may  hear  it.  If  you  do  not  hear  it, 
your  prayer  will  not  be  valid.  The  Prophet  said:  As  secret  charity 
brings  more  reward  than  open  charity,  so  secret  Quran-reading 
brings  more  reward  than  open  Quran  reading  with  sound.  In 
another  narration:  Reading  the  Quran  with  sound  is  like  open 
charity  and  silent  Quran  reading  is  like  secret  charity.  There  is  in 
Hadis  that  the  reward  of  a  secret  deed  is  seventy  times  more  than 
that  of  an  open  deed.  The  Prophet  said:  What  gives  consolation  is 
a  good  provision  and  secret  Zikr  is  the  best  Zikr. 

There  is  in  Hadis:  don't  recite  the  Quran  with  loud  voice  in 
between  sun-set  and  night  prayers.  The  Prophet  heard  one  party 
of  his  companions  reciting  the  Quran  with  loud  voice  in  night 
prayer  and  considered  it  right.  The  Prophet  said:  If  any  of  you 
stands  to  pray  Isha  (night  prayer),  let  him  read  his  Quran  openly, 
as  the  angels  and  the  inmates  of  the  house  hear  Quran  reading 
and  pray  for  him  in  lieu  of  his  prayer.  The  Prophet  saw  his  three 
companions  in  different  conditions.  When  passing  by  Abu  Bakr, 
he  heard  him  reading  silently  and  asked  him  about  it.  He  said:  He 
with  whom  I  speak  hears  it.  While  passing  by  Hazrat  Omar,  he 
heard  him  reciting  the  Quran  with  loud  voice.  He  asked  him 
about  it  and  he  said:  I  am  waking  up  the  heedless  and  the 
sleeping  men  and  driving  the  devil.  The  Prophet  passed  by  Bilal 
and  found  him  reading  some  verses  silently  and  some  with 
sound.  On  being  asked,  he  said:  I  am  mixing  good  verses  with 
good  verses.  The  Prophet  said:  Each  one  of  you  has  done  well.  In 
other  words,  he  who  fears  show  should  read  it  silently.  Open 
reading  awakens  the  mind  and  centres  the  thoughts  to  one  thing. 
It  is  better  to  recite  the  Quran  by  seeing  it  as  to  look  to  the  Quran 
is  also  worship. 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  WORSHIP  215 

To  read  the  Quran  with  sweet  voice  and  slowly  is  sunnat.  The 
Prophet  said:  God  did  not  order  sweet  voice  for  anything  except 
for  the  Quran.  He  said:  He  who  does  not  read  the  Quran  with 
sweet  voice  is  not  of  us.  It  is  narrated  that  the  Prophet  was 
waiting  one  night  for  Ayesha  as  she  was  late  in  coming.  The 
Prophet  asked  her:  Who  prevented  you  from  coming?  She  said:  O 
Prophet  of  God,  I  was  hearing  the  Quran-reading  of  a  man.  I 
never  heard  such  a  sweet  voice.  The  Prophet  came  to  him  and 
heard  his  recitation  for  a  long  time  and  said:  The  name  of  this 
man  is  Salem,  the  slave  of  Abu  Hurairah.  All  praise  is  due  to  God 
who  created  such  a  man  among  my  followers.  One  night,  the 
Prophet  heard  the  Quran-  reading  of  Hazrat  Ibn  Masud  with 
Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  and  Omar  and  there  they  remained  for  long" 
time.  Then  the  Prophet  said:  If  anybody  wishes  the  Quran  to  be 
read  with  sweet  voice  and  slowly,  let  him  hear  the 
Quran-reading  of  Ibn  Omme  Abd. 

The  Prophet  said  to  Ibn  Masud:  Read  out  the  Quran  to  me. 
He  said:  O  Prophet  of  God,  I  am  reading  it  has  been  revealed  to 
you.  The  Prophet  said:  I  wish  to  hear  it  from  you.  When  he  was 
reading  the  Quran  before  him,  the  eyes  of  the  Prophet  began  to 
shed  tears.  The  Prophet  said  after  hearing  the  Quran  reading  of 
Abu  Musa;  This  voice  has  been  given  to  him  from  the  sweet  voice 
of  David.  Hazrat  Abu  Musa  said  on  hearing  it:  O  Prophet  of  God, 
if  I  had  known  that  you  would  hear  it,  I  would  have  read  with 
sweeter  voice.  When  the  companions  of  the  Prophet  gathered 
together,  they  told  one  another  to  recite  the  Quran.  Hazrat  Omar 
once  asked  Abu  Musa:  Remember  our  Lord.  He  began  to  read  the 
Quran  before  him.  When  the  prayer  time  came,  Hazrat  Omar  was 
reminded  of  the  prayer  to  which  he  said:  Are  we  not  in  the  midst 
of  prayer?  There  is  hint  in  this  verse  of  God:  God's  rememberance 
is  greatest.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  hears  a  verse  of  God's 
Book,  there  will  be  a  light  for  him  on  the  Resurrection  Day.  There 
is  in  Hadis  that  ten  rewards  are  written  for  him. 

SECTION  3 

INTERNAL  RULES  OF  THE  QURAN-READING 

There  are  ten  internation  rules  of  reciting  the  Quran.  (1)  To 
realise  the  superiority  and  excellence  of  the  Quran.  God's  word  is 
self-existent  attribute  and  mixed  with  His  being  and  He 
expressed  that  attribute  in  human  forms  and  words  to  mankind. 


21 6  RECITATION  OF  THE  QURAN  Vol-I 

When  the  people  become  unable  to  appreciate  the  attribute  of 
God,they  are  able  to  understand  it  through  the  mean  of  this  own 
attributes.  If  the  glory  and  excellence  of  the  words  of  God  could 
not  have  been  made  understandable  in  the  garb  of  words,  the 
heaven  and  earth  could  not  stand  to  hear  His  words  and  all 
things  between  them  would  have  been  smashed  to  pieces.  If  God 
had  not  made  Moses  patient  and  steady,  he  could  not  have 
remained  without  falling  into  swoon  after  hearing  His  words  as 
the  mountain  has  no  power  to  remain  steady  being  attacked  with 
His  Brilliance.  For  this  reason,  a  friend  of  God  said  :  Every  word 
of  God  kept  in  the  Guarded  Tablet  is  higher  than  the  mountain 
Kaf.  If  all  the  angels  try  to  made  a  word  short,  they  are  unable  to 
do  it  till  the  guard  of  the  Guarded  Tablet  lifts  it  up  and  makes  it 
short  by  order  of  God.  This  is  not  because  of  the  strength  of  its 
words  but  the  Glorious  God  made  it  fit  for  human  use  dressed 
with  words.  A  wise  man  said  :  We  saw  in  case  of  human  beings 
that  when  they  wish  to  make  their  domestic  animal  understand 
something,  they  mix  some  of  their  words  with  some  unexpressed 
words  of  the  animal  and  create  some  language  to  guide  its 
nature.  It  can  under-stand  it  by  instinct  and  act  accordingly. 
Similar  is  the  case  with  men.  Though  they  are  unable  to 
understand  the  perfectness,  dignity,  beauty  and  solemnity  of 
God's  words,  the  Prophet  made  them  understand  in  such  a 
manner  as  man  conducts  his  animal  by  a  strange  language.  The 
thoughts  of  the  Quran  were  stated  with  such  words  that  men  can 
understand  the  wisdom  of  the  Quran,  as  a  lower  animal  can 
understand  the  thought  of  men  by  their  hints  and  voices  The  root 
meaning  of  wisdom  lies  concealed  in  these  words  and  voices  but 
still  it  is  honoured  on  account  of  its  meaning  Words  are  the 
bodies  of  wisdom  and  their  meaning  is  the  soul  of  wisdom  and 
voice  is  their  life. 

As  human  body  is  honoured  for  its  internal  soul,  so  the  word 
of  wisdom  is  honoured  for  its  voice  The  word  of  God  revealed 
has  got  high  rank.  It  is  just,judge  and  dear  witness  It  orders  and 
prohibits  There  is  no  such  strength  of  a  void  thing  As  shade  is 
unable  to  stand  before  the  brilliant  rays  of  the  sun,  so  a  man  is 
unable  to  stand  before  the  words  of  wisdom  of  the  Quran.  As  eye 
sight  is  unable  to  stand  before  the  scorching  rays  of  the  sun.  so  a 
man  has  got  no  power  to  enter  into  the  deepest  recess  of  wisdom. 
He  takes  so  much  rays  of  the  sun  as  he  can  see  and  know  his 
necessary  things  In"  short,  the  word  of  God  is  like  an  unseen 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  WORSHIP  217 

emperor  in  the  deepest  cover  whose  face  is  not  visible  but  yet 
whose  order  is  prevalent  The  word  of  God  is  like  the  sun  of  which 
the  rays  are  open  but  its  constitution  is  secret  like  radiant  star  By 
its  help  the  paths  of  journey  are  seen.  The  word  of  God  or  the 
Quran  is  an  invaluable  treasure  or  an  ever  lasting  drink  of  life 
which  prevents  death  or  it  is  such  a  medicine  for  a  disease  which 
leaves  no  ailment  if  it  is  taken. 

(2)  Honour  the  Quran  containing  divine  word  At  the  time  of 
reciting  the  Quran,  realise  in  a  beautiful  manner  divine  glory  and 
think  that  what  you  recite  is  is  not  human  words.  God  says :  None 
shall  touch  it  except  the  pure  ones.  As  the  external  papers  are 
preserved  from  touch  of  impure  hands,  so  its  secret  meaning  and 
wisdom  are  shut  up  from  the  internal  mind  if  it  is  not  free  form 
all  impurities  and  not  illuminated  by  the  light  of  honour  and 
gravity.  As  the  pages  of  the  Quran  cannot  be  touched  by  every 
body,  so  every  tongue  can  not  utter  the  words  of  the  Quran  and 
every  heart  cannot  grasp  its  meaning.  When  Hazrat  Akramah 
son  of  Abu  Jahl  opened  the  Quran,  he  fainted  and  said :  This  is  the 
word  of  my  Lord,  To  honour  His  word  is  to  honour  Him  and  He 
is  not  honoured  till  His  attributed  and  the  mysteries  of  His 
creation  are  not  pondered  over,  till  he  knows  that  He  is  the 
Creator  of  all  things  in  Heaven  and  earth,  and  that  He  gives  them 
Provision. 

(3)  To  recites  the  Quran  attentively  after  giving  up  one's  own 
ideas.  God  says :  O  Ihya,  hold  fast  by  God's  Book.  It  means  that  he 
should  follow  the  Book  with  industry  and  perseverance  He  who 
remains  busy  in  an  enjoyment  does  not  think  of  any  other  thing. 

(4)  To  think  about  the  Quran.  Thinking  comes  after  attention. 
For  this  reason  it  should  be  read  slowly  as  slow  reading  makes 
thinking  possible.  Hazrat  Ali  said:  There  is  no  good  in  the  divine 
service  in  which  there  is  no  knowledge  of  religion.  It  has  been 
said  that  once  the  Prophet  read  'In  the  name  of  the  Most 
Compassionate,  the  Most  Merciful'  twenty  times  thinking  about 
its  meaning.  Hazrat  Abu  Zarr  said  :  The  Prophet  prayed  with  us 
one  night.  He  recited  the  same  verse  again  and  again.  That  is  this : 
If  Thou  punisheth  them,  they  are  merely  Thy  servants  and  if 
Thou  forgiveth  them,  Thou  art  Forgiving,  Merciful. 
Sayeed-b-Jubair  once  read  the  following  verse  repeatedly 
standing  in  prayer  :  O  the  guilty,  be  separate  to-day.  Abu 
Solaiman  Darani  said  :  I  stood  in  prayer  in  four  or  five  night 


218  RECITATION  OF  THE  QURAN  Vol-I 

reciting  only  one  verse.  A  certain  sage  of  yore  passed  six  months 
by  reciting  only  the  chapter  Hud. 

(5)  To  understand  the  Quran.  Realise  true  and  correct 
meaning  of  every  verse.  Therein  there  are  the  descriptions  of 
God's  attributes,  His  wonderful  creations,  the  stories  of 
Prophets,  the  fate  of  the  liars  and  how  they  were  destroyed  and 
the  descriptions  of  Paradise  and  Hell. 

GOD'S  ATTRIBUTES:  God  says:  There  is  nothing  to  be 
compared  to  Him.  He  is  seeing,  hearing.  He  says  that  He  is  pure, 
Almighty,  Guardian,  Merciful,  Compassinate,  and  Glorious. 
Think  of  the  meaning  and  significance  of  these  names,  Behind 
them,  there  are  inner  meaning,  and  none  but  the  God  gifted 
people  can  understand  them.  Hinting  at  this  Hazrat  Ali  said :  The 
Prophet  did  not  inform  me  of  any  secret  thing  which  was  not 
disclosed  to  men.  The  real  thing  is  that  God  has  given  some 
people  to  understand  them  and  they  remain  desirous  of 
understing  them.  Hazrat  Ibn  Masud  said  :  He  who  desires  to 
acquire  the  knowledge  of  the  previous  and  future  peoples, 
should  seek  it  in  the  Quran. 

HIS  ACTIONS:  God  says  :  He  created  the  heaven  and  earth 
and  other  things.  One  who  recites  the  Quran  should  learn  from  it 
His  attributes  and  His  glory.  He  who  can  recognise  real  truth  sees 
it  in  everything  as  all  things  come  from  Him  and  return  to  Him 
and  everything  is  founded  on  truth  for  Him  and  for  His  help  He 
who'does  not  see  it  in  every  visible  thing  cannot  recognise  Him. 
He  who  can  know  Him  knows  that  everything  besides  Him  is 
void  and  everything  except  He  with  be  meeting  will  destruction. 
If  he  sees  his  being  due  to  the  existence  of  God,  he  will  see  that  he 
has  come  from  God  and  with  His  power.  If  he  walks  in  the  path  of 
servitude,  he  will  exist  and  if  he  walks  freely  he  will  not  exist. 
This  is  the  root  of  spiritual  insight.  He  should  therefore  ponder 
over  these  verses  :  Don't  you  look  at  what  you  saw?  Don't  you 
look  at  what  you  throw  semen  ?  Don't  you  look  at  the  water  you 
drink  ?  Don't  you  look  at  the  fire  you  enkindle  ?  So  think  in  these 
lines  at  the  water,  fire  crops  and  semen.  Ponder  over  the  elements 
with  which  a  man  is  created.  It  is  only  a  drop  of  semen.  Look  at  its 
different  compositions-bones,  flesh,  veins,  head,  hands,  feet 
liver,  heart  etc.  Then  all  honourable  attributes  have  been  placed 
in  it-power  of  hearing,  power  of  seeing,  wisdom,  power  of  smell. 
Then  it  has  been  given  attributes  like  anger,  sexual  passion,  pride 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  WORSHIP  219 

etc.  God  says:  Dees  man  not  consider  that  I  have  created  him 
from  a  drop  of  semen  and  he  is  then  an  open  adversary  ? 

CONDITION  OF  THE  PROPHETS:  Think  how  the  Prophets 
were  given  wonderful  qualities  for  which  they  were  oppressed. 
Some  of  them  were  murdered  and  attributed  falsehood.  Think  of 
the  condition  of  the  liars  like  the  A'd,  Samud,  etc.  Think  how  the 
rejecters  of  truth  were  punished  and  take  advice  from  their  fate. 
There  is  no  such  new  or  old  think  which  is  not  in  the  Quran.  God 
says  :  If  the  sea  were  ink  to  describe  the  attributes  of  my  Lord,it 
would  become  dry  before  it  described  the  attributes  of  my  Lord. 
For  this  reason,  Hazrat  AH  said  :  If  I  wish,  I  can  load  seventy 
camels  with  Tafsir  of  the  chapter  Fateha.  The  substance  of  what 
has  been  said  is  that  care  should  be  taken  to  understand  and 
interpret  the  Quran. 

(6)  To  be  free  from  the  impediments  of  understanding. 
Majority  of  the  people  do  not  understand  the  meaning  of  the 
Quran.  The  reason  is  that  the  devil  closed  the  door  of  their  hearts 
for  which  they  are  deprived  of  the  secret  meanings  of  the  Quran. 

•  The  Prophet  said  :  If  the  devil  would  not  have  roamed  over  the 
hearts  of  men,  they  could  have  seen  the  mysteries  of  the  unseen 

'  world.  The  real  meaning  of  the  Quran  appertains  to  the  unseen 
world.  The  thing  which  is  outside  the  grasp  of  the  five  senses  and 
cannot  be  grasped  except  by  the  light  of  sharp  insight  appertains 
to  the  unseen  world.  Similar  is  the  case  with  the  meaning  of  the 
Quran. 

FOUR  IMPEDIMENTS  OF  UNDERSTANDING 
THE  QURAN 

(1)  To  remain  busy  in  extracting  words  from  the  root  of 
words  The  devil  works  in  this  matter.  He  keeps  attached  with 
every  Quran  reader  to  keep  him  away  from  understanding  its 
meaning.  He  recites  the  words  repeatedly  and  yet  he  understand 
that  he  has  not  pronounced  it  correctly  and  rightly.  In  this  way, 
all  his  thoughts  are  centered  round  the  pronunciation  of  words. 
How  can  the  meaning  of  the  Quran  come  to  him  in  these 
circumstances  ? 

(2)  The  believe  the  sects  blindly.  The  Quran-reader  praises 
the  mazhabs  or  sects  and  follows  the  opinions  he  heard  from 
others.  He  believes  them  without  ascertaining  the  truth  or 
otherwise  of  the  opinion  of  the  sects  and  follow  them  blindly.  He 


220  RECITATION  OF  THE  QURAN  Vol-I 

then  becomes  chained  with  the  chain  of  belief  of  the  sect  and  does 
not  try  to  remove  them.  His  look  is  directed  towards  what  he 
heard.  A  man  of  firm  faith  sees  it  as  a  snare  of  the  devil  and  keeps 
away  therefrom.  Sufiyan  Saori  said  :  Sometimes  learning 
becomes  as  it  were  a  screen.  He  understands  learning  as  the 
opinion  of  his  sect. 

(3)  To  commit  a  sin  repeatedly  or  to  be  proud  or  to  remain 
immerged  in  worldly  passions.  They  are  like  dusts  on  a  mirror 
and  screen  to  radiant  star  of  truth.  It  is  a  great  screen  of  heart.  The 
greater  is  passion  and  greed  amassed  in  mind,  the  greater  is  the 
screen  over  the  mind,  and  the  lighter  is  the  worldly  burden  on 
mind,  the  greater  is  the  light  of  understanding.  Mind  is  like  a 
mirror  and  greed  and  passion  are  like  dusts  in  mind.  For  this 
reason,  the  Prophet  said :  When  my  followers  will  consider  their 
wealth  as  great,  fear  of  Islam  will  disappear  from  their  hearts. 
When  they  will  give  up  enjoinging  good  and  forbidding  evils, 
they  will  be  deprived  of  the  blessings  of  revelation.  Fuzail 
explained  it  by  saying  that  they  will  be  deprived  of 
understanding  the  meaning  of  the  Quran.  God  made  a  condition 
of  the  acceptance  of  Tauba  on  understanding  and  repentance, 
God  says  :  This  is  deep  insight  and  reminder  for  every  penitent 
servant.  God  says  :  None  but  a  repentant  man  remembers.  God 
says :  Only  the  wise  remember. 

(4)  To  accept  open  meaning  and  to  believe  that  there  is  no 
inner  meaning  except  external  meaning  of  the  Quran.  Hazrat  Ibn 
Abbas,  Muzahed  and  other  companions  said  that  there  is 
provision  for  explaining  it  according  to  individual  opinion.  "If 
anybody  explains  it  according  to  his  opinion,  let  him  seek  his 
abode  in  Hell  fire."  This  is  a  great  obstacle.  He  gets 
understanding  whom  God  gives  it.  If  open  meaning  is  accepted, 
then  there  arises  difference  therein. 

(5)  To  give. speciality  to  every  verse,  in  other  words  to  give 
speciality  to  every  call  of  the  Quran.  If  you  hear  commands  and 
prohibitions  of  the  Quran,  think  thus  :  This  command  has  been 
given  to  me  and  this  prohibition  has  been  directed  against  me.  If 
you  hear  any  warning,  consider  that  it  has  come  about  you.  When, 
you  hear  the  stories  of  the  Prophets  and  early  persons,  think  that 
it  is  not  merely  a  story  for  your  information  but  you  are  asked  to 
take  lessons  from  it  and  to  take  what  is  necessary  therefrom. 
There  is  surely  some  benefit  for  the  Prophet  and  for  his  followers 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  WORSHIP  221 

in  the  subject  matter  of  the  Quran.  For  this  reason,  God  says  :  'I 
settle  your  mind  therewith.'  So  the  people  should  think  that  by 
describing  the  stories  of  the  Prophets,  God  settled  the  mind  of  the 
Prophet,  gave  him  patience  to  bear  troubles  and  hardships,  made 
him  firm  in  religion  so  that  God's  victory  can  be  seen  by  him. 
How  will  you  not  be  able  to  do  it  when  the  Quran  was  not 
revealed  only  for  the  Prophet  alone  but  it  is  a  medicine  for  all 
diseases,  guide  for  all,  blessing  for  all  light  for  the  whole 
universe.  So  God  has  directed  all  men  to  get  blessing  by  the  help 
of  the  Quran  God  says :  Remember  the  blessing  of  God  on  you  all 
and  what  has  been  revealed  to  you  all  from  the  Book  and  wisdom 
with  which  you  admonish  them.  God  says :  I  have  revealed  upon 
you  all  such  a  Quran  in  which  there  are  descriptions  of  yore. 
Don't  you  then  mind  it? 

God  says :  I  have  revealed  the  Reminder  to  you  that  you  may 
explain  to  the  people  what  has  been  revealed  upon  them.  God 
says  :  Follow  the  best  out  of  what  has  been  revealed  to  you  from 
your  Lord.  This  is  a  guide  for  the  people,  a  guide  and  a  bless  for 
those  who  believe  firmly.  God  says :  The  Quran  is  explainer  to  the 
people,  a  guide  for  its  followers  and  an  admonisher.  In  these 
verses,  all  people  have  been  addressed  and  not  a  particular  man. 
The  readers  of  the  Quran  are  also  among  them.  For  this  reason, 
their  object  will  be  as  God  says :  This  Quran  has  been  revealed  on 
me  that  I  may  warn  you  there  with  and  those  to  whom  it  reaches. 
Mohammad-b-Ka'ab  said :  He  who  reads  the  Quran  speaks  with 
God  as  it  were.  A  certain  learned  man  said  :  This  Quran  is  an 
embodiment  of  some  letters  which  have  come  to  us  with  His 
promise,  so  that  we  may  understand  them  in  prayer,  so  that  we 
may  ponder  over  them  in  loneliness  and  admit  them  in  our 
religious  affairs  and  sunnat  which  is  followed.  Malek-b-Dinar 
said  :  The  Quran  is  the  fountain  of  a  believer  just  as  rain  is  the 
fountain  of  earth.  God  says  5  It  is  a  cure  and  a  blessing  for  the 
believer  and  it  increase  nothing  but  loss  to  the  oppressors. 

(8)  Mind  influenced  by  reading 

As  there  are  different  verses,  so  different  thoughts  should  fall 
in  your  mind.  You  should  have  change  of  condition  and  thoughts 
according  to  the  meaning  of  each  verse.  So  in  your  mind  there 
should  be  feelings  of  sorrows,  fear,  hope  etc.  You  should  find 
forgiveness  and  blessings  attached  with  some  verses  and  a  wise 
man  tries  to  get  it  as  God  says  :  I  am  forgiving  to  one  who  is 


222  RECITATION  OF  THE  QURAN  Vol-I 

repentant,  has  got  faith  and  does  good  deeds  and  who  finds 
guidance.  This  forgiveness  is  based  on  four  conditions- 
repentance,  faith,  good  deeds  and  guidance.  God  says  :  Man  is 
surely  in  loss  except  those  who  have  got  faith,  do  good  deeds, 
advice  one  another  with  truth  and  for  patience.  He  mentioned 
four  conditions  even  in  this  verse.  God  says  :  God's  blessing  is 
near  those  who  do  good  to  the  people.  Sufiyan  Saori  said  :  By 
God,  if  a  man  reads  the  Quran  in  the  morning  and  brings  faith  in 
it,  his  sorrows  increase,  his  happiness  decreases,  his  actions 
increase  and  his  comforts  decrease.  The  Prophet  said  once  to  Ibn 
Masud  :  Recite  the  Quran  to  men.  He  said  :  I  began  to  read  the 
chapter  'Women'.  When  I  reached  this  verse  :  How  will  it  be 
when  I  shall  bring  every  people  with  a  witness  and  bring  you  as 
witness  over  them  ?  I  saw  that  his  eyes  were  shedding  tears.  He 
said  to  me :  This  is  sufficient  now.  Seeing  this  condition,  my  mind 
became  filled  up  with  fear. 

Those  were  God-fearing  people  who  used  to  faint  when  they 
heard  some  verse  of  the  Quran  and  even  some  of  them  met  with 
instantaneous  death.  God  says :  How  many  signs  there  are  in  the 
heaven  and  earth  which  pass  by  them  but  they  turn  there  aces 
from  them.  A  wise  man  said  :  Whose  recites  the  Quran  and  does 
not  imbue  himself  with  that  idea.  God  says  to  him  :  What 
connection  have  you  got  with  My  word  ?  You  have  turned  your 
face  from  me.  The  sinner  who  reads  the  Quran  repeately  is  like  a 
man  who  reads  the  letter  of  the  king  repeatedly.  Therein  there  is 
order  to  him  for  making  his  reign  firm  but  he  remains  busy  to 
recite  it  and  thinks  that  to  read  the  letter  is  sufficient.  If  he  does 
not  read  the  letter  and  acts  contrary  to  the  order  of  the  king,  his 
order  is  hated  and  he  becomes  an  object  of  wrath  of  the  king.  He 
who  acts  contrary  to  the  commands  of  the  Quran  is  guilty 
according  to  this  verse  :  They  threw  it  behind  them  and  took 
small  price  in  lieu  of  it.  How  bad  is  that  which  they  purchase. 

The  Prophet  said:  Recite  the  Quran  till  you  pay  attention  to  it 
and  till  the  skin  of  your  body  is  alright.  Close  it  when  this 
condition  does  not  remain.  God  says  :  When  God  is  remined  to 
them,  their  hearts  become  soft  and  when  the  verses  are  read  out 
to  them,  their  faith  increases  and  they  rely  over  their  Lord.  The 
Prophet  said :  The  sweetent  voice  in  reciting  the  Quran  is  of  that  a 
man  who  fears  God  when  he  makes  it  recitation.  The  Prophet 
said.  The  Quran  is  not  heard  from  anybody  so  sweet  as  it  is 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  WORSHIP  223 

heard  from  the  God-fearing  men.  When  the  Prophet  expired,  he 
left  behind  him  twenty  thousand  companions  out  of  whom  only 
six  committed  the  whole  Quran  by  heart  Majority  of  the 
companions  committed  to  memory  only  one  or  two  chapters. 
They  moved  their  tongue  very  li  ttleas  theQu  ra  n  reci  ters  withou  t 
action  are  fit  to  receive  rebuke  according  to  the  following  verse : 
If  a  man  turns  away  from  My  remembrance,  there  is  narrow 
provision  for  him  and  he  will  be  raised  up  blind  on  the 
Resurrection  Day.  This  verse  is  also  applicable  to  him  :  This  My 
verse  came  to  you  butyou  forgot  it.  You  will  be  forgotten  to.  day 
inasimilar  manner. 

(9)  To  raise  up  mind.  Raise  up  your  mind  by  reciting  the 
Quran  so  much  that  you  are  hearing  the  words  of  God.  There  are 
three  excellences  in  reciting  the  Quran.  The  lowest  excellence  is 
that  a  man  should  think  that  he  recites  the  Quran  standing  before 
God  and  that  He  sees  and  hears  his  recitation.  At  this  time,  he 
should  invoke  and  pray.  Secondly  your  mind  will  bear  witness  at 
the  time  of  reciting  the  Quran  that  God  sees  you  and  He  is 
speaking  secretly  with  you.  You  should  apply  your  full  mind  to  it 
and  be  careful  of  its  understanding.  Thirdly,  you  will  see  God  in 
the  recitation  of  the  Quran  and  His  attributes. 

The  reciter  who  is  outside  these  three  things  gets  the  rank  of 
the  heedless.  Imam  Jafar  Saleq  said  with  regard  to  the  highest 
rank  :  By  God,  God  disclosed  His  light  for  His  servants  in  His 
words  but  they  do  not  see  it.  He  once  fell  in  swoon  in  prayer. 
When  he  regained  his  senses,  he  said  :  I  was  repeatedly  reciting 
the  verse  of  the  Quran  in  my  heart  and  I  then  heard  it  as  it  were 
from  its  author.  My  body  could  not  stand  at  His  glory.  If  the  mind 
is  rasied  high,  one  can  get  sweetness  in  invocation.  Hazrats 
Osman  and  Huzaifah  said  :  If  the  mind  becomes  pure,  it  cannot 
rest  satisfied  only  with  the  recitation  of  the  Quran.  The  sage  Sabet 
Bonani  said :  I  bore  hardships  for  20  years  and  have  been  getting 
His  gifts  for  the  last  20  years.  One  can  become  fit  for  this  verse  on 
account  of  his  sight  of  the  author  of  words  :  Flee  towards  God. 
Another  verse.  Don't  set  up  partner  with  God.'  He  who  does  not 
see  Him  in  his  every  action,  sees  someone  else  and  he  who  looks 
to  anything  besides  God  sees  towards  secret  Shirk.  To  see  nobody 
in  any  action  except  God  is  sincere  Tauhid. 

(10)  To  be  free  from  ones  own  strength  and  ability  and  not  to 
see  towards  himself  with  the  eye  of  pleasure  and  purity.  When 


224  RECITATION  OF  THE  QURAN  Vol-I 

you  read  the  words  of  praise  of  pious  men,  don' t  include  yourself 
among  them,  but  hope  that  God  may  include  yourself  among 
them.  When  you  read  the  verse  of  the  punishment  of  the 
transgressors,  think  that  it  was  said  about  you.  Hazrat  Ibn  Omar 
used  to  say  :  O  God,  I  seek  forgiveness  from  you  for  my  sins  and 
infidelity. 

SECTION  4 

TO  INTERPRET  THE  QURAN  ACCORDING  TO 
INDIVIDUAL  OPINION 

The  Prophet  said  :  If  a  man  explains  the  Quran  according  to 
his  opinion,  let  him,  seek  his  abode  in  Hell'.  Thelearned  men  who 
explain  it  according  to  its  literal  meaning  accuse  the  Sufis  for 
their  explanation.  They  explain  the  verse  of  the  Quran  which  Ibn 
Abbas  or  other  companions  did  not  make.  The  spirit  of  the  above 
Hadis  is  that  the  Quran  should  be  interpreted  according  to  the 
sayings  and  doings  of  the  Prophet.  Difference  arises  when  it  is 
believed  that  there  is  no  meaning  of  the  Quran  except  its  open 
meaning.  The  meaning  of  the  Quran  is  wide  to  the  wise.  Hazrat 
Ali  said  :  God  has  given  His  servant  the  understanding  of  the 
Quran.  If  it  is  not  without  the  Tafsirs  of  the  early  sages,  what  is 
the  meaning  of  this  understanding  ?  The  Prophet  said  :  There  are 
surely  for  the  Quran  open  meaning,  secret  meaning,  limits  and 
different  steps.  Hazrat  Ali  said  :  If  I  wish,  I  can  load  seventy 
camels  withTafsir  of  the  chapter  Fateha'  What  is  it  meaning? 

Hazrat  Abu  Darda'a  said:  Nobody  can  be  Faqih  till  he 
accepts  the  Quran  in  different  forms.  A  certain  learned  man  said : 
There  are  sixty  meanings  of  every  verse  Another  learned  man 
said  :  The  Quran  is  the  embodinent  of  77,200  learning  as  every 
word  is  a  learning  and  it  is  increased  four  times.  Every  word  has 
got  its  external  and  internal  meanings  and  has  got  high,  higher 
and  highest  steps.  The  Prophet  once  recited  'Bismillah'  twenty 
times.  For  what  purpose  was  it  nead  repeatedly  except  for  its 
inner  meaning  ?  Hazrat  Ibn  Masud  said  :  If  a  man  desires  to  gain 
knowledge  of  the  earlier  and  future  peoples,  he  should  ponder 
over  the  Quran.  It  is  not  acquired  by  only  external  Tafsirs.  The 
Quran  speaks  of  His  glory  and  might  which  are  unlimited. 
Therefore  the  explanations  of  the  Quran  are  unlimited. 

The  Prophet  said:  Read  the  Quran  and  search  for  its 
unknown  matters.  The  Prophet  said  about  Hazrat  Ali  :  By  One 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  WORSHIP  225 

who  sent  me  with  truth,  my  followers  will  be  divided  into 
seventy  three  sects  in  matters  of  the  fundamental  principles  of 
religion  and  Jamaat.  Every  sect  will  be  misguided  and  call 
towards  Hell.  When  it  will  occur,  hold  firm  to  the  Book  of  God,  as 
it  contains  the  stroires  of  your  predecessors  and  successors  and 
decisions  about  what  you  differ.  Whose  opposes  the  Quran 
among  the  transfressors,  God  punishes  him.  Whose  search 
learning  other  than  the  Quran,  God  misguides  him  as  the  Quran 
is  the  firmest  tie,  open  light  and  benefiting  medicine.  If  anybody 
holds  it  firm,  it  protects  him.  If  one  follows  it,  it  gives  him 
salvation.  There  is  no  cutting  of  the  miracles  of  the  Quran  and  it 
does  not  become  old  for  repeated  readings.  When  the  Prophet 
told  Huzaifa  of  different  sects  and  differences,  he  asked  him  :  O 
Prophet  of  God,  if  I  get  that  time,  what  do  you  order  me  to  do  ?  He 
said  :  Learn  the  Book  of  God  and  act  upon  it,  as  there  is  salvation 
in  it.  Hazrat  Ali  said :  He  who  understands  the  Quran  acquires  all 
the  learnings  together.  There  is  hint  in  this  that  the  Quran 
contains  all  the  learnings.  The  Quran  says  :  He  who  has  been 
given  wisdom  has  been  given  abundant  good.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas 
explained  this  word  wisdom  as  the  knowledge  of  the  Quran.  God 
says  :  I  gave  Soloman  knowledge,  wisdom  and  learning.  What 
has  been  given  to  him  was  termed  as  wisdom  and  learning.  The 
speciality  which  has  been  given  to  him  is  learning  and  it  has  been 
given  to  him  before  wisdom. 

Regarding  the  external  meaning  of  the  Quran,  there  are 
innumerable  sayings  of  the  Prophet.  The  Prophet  said  :  He  who 
interprets  the  Quran  according  to  his  own  opinion  should  seek 
his  abode  in  Hell  Thus  he  prohibited  individual  interpretation 
according  to  his  own  opinion.  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr  said  :  If  I 
interpret  the  Quran  according  to  my  opinion  what  world  will 
give  me  protection  and  what  sky  will  give  me  shade  ?  This 
prohibition  has  got  two  objects.  The  first  object  is  to  limit  it  in 
Hadis  and  Tafsir,  not  to  discover  new  meanings  and  to  give  up 
independent  thinking.  The  second  object  is  other  than  that.  If  its 
object  is  that  a  man  cannot  interpret  the  Quran  except  according 
to  the  standard  Tafsirs,  it  is  void  for  the  reasons  given  below. 

(1)  One  condition  of  interpretation  is  that  it  should  rest  upon 
the  interpretation  of  the  Prophet.  If  it  is  accepted.  Tafsirs  of  Ibn 
Abbas  and  Ibn  Masud  cannot  be  accepted  as  they  had  their 
opinion  also  therein. 


226  RECITATION  OF  THE  QURAN  Vol-I 

(2)  There  are  different  opinions  regarding  the  inter  pretation 
of  some  verses  among  the  companions.  It  was  not  possible  for 
them  to  be  unanimous.  Everybody  did  not  interpret  it  after 
hearing  it  from  the  Prophet,  then  their  own  opinions  are  fit  to  be 
rejected.  It  is  well  known  that  the  interpreters  extracted  many 
meanings  by  applying  their  intellect.  Even  they  had  seven 
interpretations  of  the  abbreviated  words  at  the  beginning  of  a 
chapter.  So  how  can  it  be  said  that  they  interpretated  them  by 
hearing  every  thing  from  the  Prophet? 

(3)  The  Prophet  prayed  for  Ibn  Abbas  by  saying :  O  God,  give 
him  knowledge  in  theology  and  give  him  learning  of 
interpretation.  What  is  then  the  meaning  of  his  special  prayer  for 
him  if  interpretation  cannot  come  except  from  his  saying? 

(4)  "Those  who  discover  meaning  by  their  intellect  know  it 
certainly'-  in  this  verse,  to  discover  meanings  by  exercise  of 
intellect  by  the  learned  men  has  been  spoken  of.  To  discover 
open  meanings  is  different  from  what  is  heard.  The  tradition 
regarding  the  interpretation  of  the  Quran  is  opposed  to  this 
verse.  So  it  appears  that  it  is  incorrect  to  impose  condition  of 
Tafsir  only  in  all  interpretations  and  it  is  lawful  to  discover  the 
meaning  of  the  Quran  according  to  the  limit  of  one's  own 
intelligence  and  intellect. 

There  are  however  two  reasons  for  the  prohibition  of 
interpreting  the  Quran  according  to  one's  opinion.  One  reason  is 
that  a  man  has  got  his  own  individual  opinion  with  regard  to 
every  matter  and  actually  he  is  inclined  to  that  opinion.  He  also 
interprets  the  Quran  according  to  his  wish  and  desire  to  serve  his 
own  end.  For  this  reason  he  thinks  that  his  interpretation  is 
correct  and  lawful.  He  recites  the  Quranic  verses  to  support  his 
opinion.  Thus  he  decries  his  adversary  and  he  knows  that  this  is 
not  real  meaning.  This  is  interpretation  according  to  one's  own 
misguided  opinion.  The  Prophet  said  :  Eat  pre-dawn  tiffin  as 
there  is  blessing  in  it.  They  interpret  it  as  Zikr  in  place  the  real 
meaning  tiffin.  The  Quran  says:  Go  to  Pharaoh  as  he  has 
transgressed  the  limit.  They  interpret  the  word  'Pharaoh'  as  heart. 

(2)  To  discover  the  meanings  of  those  verses  which  are  not 
understandable  and  short  without  Hadis  and  Tafsir.  He  who  is 
not  expert  in  external  meanings  and  discovers  their  meanings 
only  by  intellect  commit  many  mistakes.  He  belongs  to  that  class 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  WORSHIP  227 

of  men  who  interpret  it  according  to  their  opinions.  At  first,  there 
is  necessity  of  Hadis  and  Tafsir  for  external  meanings  in  order  to 
be  free  from  mistakes  and  then  with  the  advancement  of 
knowledge,  meanings  come  out  from  intellect.  He  who  claims  to 
have  internal  meanings  of  the  Quran  without  at  first  being  expert 
in  its  external  meanings  is  like  a  man  who  claims  to  have  reached 
the  interior  of  a  house  without  first  approaching  its  door  or  like  a 
man  who  claims  to  have  understood  the  object  of  a  Turk  without 
understanding  his  language.  To  learn  open  meaning  is  like 
learning  a  language.  In  Tafsir,  there  is  explanation  of  also 
interna]  meanings.  For  instance,  God  says :  I  gave  to  the  nation  of 
Samud  a  she-camel  as  open  sign  but  they  made  oppression  on 
account  of  it.  Here  the  word  'sign'  is  omitted.  He  will  interpret  it 
openly  by  saying  that  the  she  camel  had  power  of  sight  and  was 
not  blind.  God  says  :  On  account  of  their  infidelity,  dring  of  calf 
was  given  to  their  hearts.  In  other  words,  they  thought  the 
worship  of  calf  as  dear  on  account  of  their  indfidelity.  Here  to 
think  'dear'  has  been  omitted.  God  says :  I  gave  you  to  taste  of  life 
on  the  taste  of  death.  In  other  words:  I  gave  you  the  taste  of 
severity  of  punishment  of  life  and  of  death.  The  word 
'punishment'  has  been  omitted  in  this  verse.  God  says  :  Ask  the 
city  where  we  were  and  the  mountain  to  which  we  proceeded.  In 
other  words.  Ask  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  and  the  mountain. 
The  word  'inhabitants'  have  been  omitted.  God  says  :  It  has 
become  heavy  in  heavens  and  earth.  In  other  words:  It  has  been 
made  secret  for  the  inhabitants  of  the  heavens  and  earth  God  says 
:  You  make  your  provision  such  as  if  you  are  telling  lies.  In  other 
words :  You  express  gratefulness  for  your  provision.  God  says :  I 
have  revealed  it  in  the  Blessed  night.  In  other  words,  I  have 
revealed  the  Quran  in  the  Blessed  night.  God  says :  Till  it  became 
covered  with  screen.  'It' means  here  sun.  God  says  :  Peace  be  on 
Al  Yasin.  The  latter  word  means  Elias. 

The  word  'Qareen'  has  got  different  meanings.  It  means 
angel  in  this  verse  :  His  companion  (angel)  said  :  He  who  is  near 
me  is  a  rebel.  It  means  the  devil  in  this  verse  :  His  companion 
(devil)  said :  O  our  Lord,  I  have  not  misguided  him.  Similarly,  the 
word  "Ummat"  has  got  different  meanings  in  the  Quran.  It  means 
a  group  of  men  in  this  verse :  He  saw  a  party  of  men  to  give  drink 
of  water.  It  means  the  followers  of  a  Prophet  in  this  verse:  We 
belong  to  the  followers  of  Muhammad  (P.H.).  It  means  the 
possessor  of  all  virtues  in  this  verse  :  Abraham  was  possessor  of 


228  RECITATION  OF  THE  QURAN  Vol-I 

all  virtues.  It  rheans  an  age  in  this  verse :  Up  to  a  fixed  age.  Similar 
is  the  case  with  the  meaning  of  the  word  "Ruh." 

(6)  To  interpret  the  same  subject  gradually.  God  say  :  The 
month  of  Ramzan  in  which  the  Quran  has  been  revealed.  This 
verse  does  not  disclose  when  it  was  revealed,  day  or  night.  Then 
the  next  verse. says :  I  revealed  it  in  a  blessed  night.  This  verse  first 
speaks  of  revelation  by  night.  Then  this  verse  was  revealed  :  I 
revealed  it  in  the  blessed  night. 

Then  to  take  internal  meaning  of  a  verse,  Tafsir  is  not 
sufficient.  God  says  :  You  have  not  shot  arrows  when  you  shot 
arrows  but  God  shot  arrows.  The  external  meaning  of  the 
sentence  is  clear,  but  its  internal  meaning  is  one  secret  as  there  is 
therein  the  meanings  of  both  throwing  arrows  and  not  throwing 
arrows  which  are  contradictory  to  each  other.  So  the  knowledge 
of  the  reason  of  throwing  is,  essential.  The  reason  for  which  it  is 
said  that  you  did  not  throw  arrows  but  God  threw  arrows  is  in 
the  following  verse  :  Fight  with  them  God  will  punish  them 
through  your  hands.  This  lies  in  the  deep  ocean  of  spiritual 
knowledge.  Firstly,  know  that  the  action  of  a  man  is  tied  up  with 
his  strength  and  that  strength  is  tied  up  with  the  power  of  God. 
Every  verse  of  the  Quran  similarly  has  got  a  secret  meaning.  It  is 
clear  to  those  whose  hearts  are  clear  of  impurities  of  thoughts 
and  ideas.  So  open  Tafsirs  are  not  sufficient  for  understanding 
the  internal  meanings  of  verses.  These  internal  meanings  are  not 
opposed  to  the  external  meanings.  God  knows  best. 


CHAPTER  IX 

ZIKR  AND  INVOCATIONS 

God  says  :  Remember  Me,  I  will  remember  you.  He  ordered 
His  servants  to  pray  and  to  invoke  by  this  verse :  Invoke  me,  I  will 
respond  to  you.  So  the  religious,  sinners,  near  and  distant  ones 
should  pray  to  God  for  fulfillment  of  their  desires.  He  says :  I  am 
near.  I  respond  to  the  invocation  of  one  who  invokes  Me.  So  there 
is  nothing  better  than  God's  Zikr  and  invocations  to  Him.  This 
will  be  discussed  in  five  sections. 

SECTION  1 

EXCELLENCE  OF  ZIKR 

God  says  :  Remember  Me.  I  shall  remember  you.  The  sage 
Sabet  Bonani  said  :  I  know  when  my  Lord  remembers  me.  The 
people  asked  him  How  do  you  know  ?  He  said  :  He  remembers 
me  when  I  remember  Him.  God  says:  Rem,ember  God  too  much. 
He  says  :  When  you  return  from  Arafat,  remember  God  near 
Masharu'i  Haram  and  remember  Him  as  God  has  given  you 
guidance.  God  says  :  When  you  finish  the  institutions  of  Haj, 
remember  God  more  than  you  remember  your  parents  at  that 
time.  God  says  :  They  are  wise  who  remember  God  standing, 
sitting  and  lying  on  a  side.  God  says  :  When  you  finish  prayer, 
remember  God  standing,  sitting,  and  lying  on  your  sides.  Hazrat 
Ibn  Abbas  said  :  Remember  God  day  and  night,  on  land  and 
water,  in  jounery  and  habitation,  in  solvency  and  want,  in  health 
and  disease,  openly  and  secretly.  God  says  rebuking  the 
hypocrites  :  They  remember  God  very  little.  God  says  : 
Remember  your  Lord  in  your  heart  with  humility  and  in  fear 
silently  morning  and  evening  and  be  not  of  the  heedless.  God 
says  :  Zikr  of  God  is  the  highest.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas  said  :  This  is 
for  two  reasons.  One  reason  is  that  God's  remembrance  of  you  is 
better  than  your  remembrance  of  God.  Another  reason  is  that 
God's  remembrance  is  better  than  all  other  divine  services. 

HADIS:  This  Prophet  said :  One  engaged  in  the  Zikr  of  God 
among  the  heedless  is  like  a  living  tree  in  the  midst  of  dry  trees. 
He  said  :  One  busy  in  Zikr  in  the  midst  of  the  heedless  is  like  a 
warrior  in  the  way  of  God  in  the  midst  of  those  soldiers  who  fled 
away.  The  Prophet  said :  God  says :  I  remain  with  a  servant  till  he 
remembers  Me  and  moves  his  lips  for  Me.  There  is  no  action  of 


230  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

man  except  Zikr  of  God  which  can  give  him  salvation.  They 
asked  him  :  O  Prophet  of  God,  not  even  jihad  in  the  way  of  God? 
He  said :  Not  even  jihad  in  the  way  of  God,  except  that  it  will  give 
salvation  only  when  it  is  cut  to  pieces  owing  to  your  strike  by 
your  sword  and  then  it  is  again  cut  to  pieces  owing  to  your  strike 
by  your  sword.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  anybody  wishes  to  enter  the 
garden  of  paradise,  let  him  remember  God  much.  He  was  asked : 
Which  action  is  best  ?  He  said  :  Your  meeting  with  death  in  the 
condition  of  your  tongue  being  saturated  with  Zikr  of  God.  The 
Prophet  said  :  Saturate  your  tongue  with  the  Zikr  of  God 
morning  and  evening,  you  will  have  no  sin  morning  and 
evening.  He  said  :  God's  Zikr  morning  and  evening  is  better  than 
attack  with  sword  in  the  way  of  God  and  giving  wealth  in 
charity.  The  Prophet  said  :  God  says  :  When  My  servant 
remembers  Me  silently,  I  remember  Him  silently.  When  he 
remembers  Me  among  the  people,  I  remember  him  among  a 
party  better  than  them.  When  he  comes  to  Me  half  a  cubit,  I 
advaA«ceto  him  a  cubit.  When  he  comes  to  Me  a  cubit,  I  go  to  him 
two  cubits.  When  he  comes  to  Me  on  foot,  I  go  to  him  hastily.  The 
Prophet  said :  On  the  day  when  there  will  be  no  shade  except  the 
shade  of  God,  God  will  give  shade  under  His  shade  seven 
persons-one  who  remembers  God  sincerely  and  shed  tears  for 
fear  of  God  etc.  The  Prophet  said  :  Shall  I  not  inform  you  of  an 
action  dearest  to  God,  greatest  to  your  Lord,  highest  in  rank, 
better  fruitful  than  charity  of  your  gold  and  silver  and  your 
striking  with  sword  the  necks  of  the  enemies  of  God  and  the 
strike  on  you  necks  ?  They  said  :  O  Messenger  of  God,  what  is  it? 
He  said  :  Constant  remembrance  of  God.  The  Prophet  said  :  God 
says  :  If  a  man  refrains  from  invoking  Me  because  of  his 
remaining  busy  with  my  remembrance  I  give  him  better  than 
those  who  invoke  Me. 

Wise  sayings.  The  sage  Fuzail  said  :  We  have  been  informed 
that  if  a  man  makes  God's  Zikr  one  hour  after  the  morning  prayer 
and  one  hour  after  the  Asr  prayer,  it  expiates  all  his  sins.  A  wise 
man  said  :  God  says  :  If  I  see  My  Zikr  prevailing  in  the  mind  of  a 
man,  I  take  the  administration  of  his  affairs  and  I  become  his 
companion,  adviser  and  friend.  Hasan  Basari  said  :  Zikr  is  of  two 
kinds — (1)  God's  Zikr  in  your  mind  and  (2)  better  than  this  is  to 
remember  God  at  the  time  of  commission  of  an  unlawful  action. 
Some  said  that  every  soul  will  come  out  of  the  world  thirsty 
except  one  which  remembers  God.  Muaz-b-Jabal  said  :  The 


I 


Vol-I  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  231 

inmates  of  Paradise  will  not  grieve  for  anything  except  for  the 
time  which  passed  without  remembrance  of  God. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  THE  ASSEMBLY  OF  ZIKR 

The  Prophet  said :  If  a  party  of  men  are  engaged  in  the  Zikr  of 
God,  the  angels  surround  them,  mercy  encompasses  them  and 
He  remembers  them  before  His  near  angels.  The  Prophet  said  :  If 
a  party  of  men  makes  Zikr  of  God  for  pleasure  of  God  a 
proclaimer  proclaims  from  heaven :  Your  sins  have  been  forgiven 
and  you  have  been  given  virtues  in  lieu  of  your  sins.  The  Prophet 
said  :  If  a  party  of  men  make  no  Zikr  of  God  sitting  together  and 
send  no  blessing  on  the  Prophet,  they  will  be  repentant  on  the 
Resurrection  Day.  Prophet  David  said :  O  my  Lord,  when  you  see 
me  joining  the  heedless  after  giving  up  the  assembly  of  Zikr  of 
God,  break  my  feet  under  their  feet,  as  it  will  be  a  gift  cast  upon 
me,  The  Prophet  said  :  An  assembly  of  virtue  of  the  believers 
expiate  two  thousand  assemblies  of  sin.  Hazrat  Abu  Hurairah 
said  :  As  you  see  the  stars,  so  the  inmates  of  heaven  see  a  house  of 
the  inmates  of  the  world  wherein  God  is  remembered. 
Sufiyan-b-Aynah  said :  When  a  party  of  men  gather  together  and 
remember  God,  the  devil  and  the  world  become  separate  from 
them.  The  devil  says  to  the  world  :  Don't  you  see  what  they  are 
doing"?  The  world  says  :  Leave  them  as  when  they  will  be 
separate  from  one  another,  I  will  take  them  to  you  catching  their 
necks.  Hazrat  Abu  Huraiah  said  that  he  went  one  day  into  the 
market  and  said  :  I  see  you  here,  but  the  properties  left  by  the 
Prophet  are  being  distributed  in  the  mosque.  The  People  went  to 
the  mosque  but  saw  no  distribution  of  any  property.  They  then 
went  to  Abu  Hurairah  and  said  :  O  Abu  Hurairah,  we  find  no 
distribution  of  property  in  the  mosque.  He  asked  :  What  then 
have  you  seen  ?  They  said :  We  found  a  party  of  men  making  Zikr 
of  God  and  reciting  the  Quran.  He  said :  This  is  the  heritage  of  the 
Prophet.  The  Prophet  said  :  Some  angels  of  God  roam  in  the 
world  and  write  down  additional  record  of  deeds.  If  they  see  a 
party  of  believers  making  Zikr  of  God,  they  proclaim :  Come  with 
your  actions.  They  come  with  their  actions  and  they  take  them 
towards  the  heaven.  God  says :  What  action  of  My  servants  have 
you  seen  ?  They  say  :  We  saw  them  praising  Three,  glorifying 
Thee  and  declaring  Thy  purity.  God  says :  Do  they  see  Me?  They 
say  :  No.  God  says  :  If  they  could  have  seen  Me,  how  will  it  be? 
They  said  :  If  they  could  have  seen  Thee  they  would  have  rectied 


232  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

Thy  Tasbih,  Tahmid  and  Tamzid  more,  God  says  to  them :  From 
what  thing  do  they  seek  reguge  ?  They  say :  From  Hell.  God  says : 
Have  they  seen  it?  They  said  :  No.  God  says  :  If  they  had  seen  it, 
what  would  they  have  done?  They  said  :  If  they  had  seen  it,  they 
would  have  fled  away  more  from  it.  God  says  :  What  do  they 
seek.  They  say  :  Paradise.  God  says  :  How  will  it  be  if  they  had 
seen  it  ?  They  say  :  If  they  has  seen  it,  they  would  have  desired  it 
more.  God  says  :  I  bear  witness  before  you  that  I  have  forgiven 
them.  They  say  :  A  certain  man  did  not  come  to  them  with  that 
object  except  for  his  own  personal  needs.  God  says  :  They  are 
such  party  whose  companion  will  not  be  unfortunate. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  TAHLIL 

The  Prophet  said:  What  I  said  first  and  also  my  predecessor 
prophets  is  this — 'there  is  no  deity  but  God.  He  is  One,  there  is  no 
partner  for  Him.  The  Prophet  said  :  He  who  recites  this  Doa  one 
hundred  times  There  is  no  deity  but  God,  the  single,  there  is  no 
partner  for  Him,  kingdom  is  His  and  all  praise  is  His  and  He  is 
powerful  over  all  things",  the  rewards  of  setting  free  ten  slaves 
are  written  for  him,  one  hundred  rewards  are  written  in  his 
record  of  deeds  and  one  hundred  sins  are  wiped  out  from  him 
and  he  remains  safe  from  the  machinations  of  the  devil  on  that 
day  up  to  night.  He  who  does  more  than  this,  his  rewards  are 
more  and  nobody  acts  more  virtuous^ct  than  it.  The  Prophet  said 
:  He  who  makes  ablution  and  reads  /Doa  after  looking  towards 
heaven — "Ibear  witness  that  there  is  no  deity  but  God.  He  is 
single,  there  is  no  partner  for  Him  and  I  bear  witness  that 
Muhammad  is  His  servant  and  apostle",  the  doors  of  Paradise  are 
opened  up  for  him  and  he  enters  it  by  whichever  door  he  likes. 
The  Prophet  said  :  Those  who  utter — "There  is  no  deity  but  God" 
there  will  be  no  loneliness  for  them  in  their  grave  or  after  their 
resurrection  from  the  grave.  I  am  seeing  them  as  it  were  when 
they  utter  it  loudly,  their  heads  are  emerging  from  earth  and  they 
are  uttering  'all  praise  is  due  to  God  who  removed  sorrows  from 
us.  Our  Lord  is  forgiving,  acceptor  of  gratefulness.'  The  Prophet 
said  :  O  Abu  Hurairah,  the  virtues  which  you  do  will  be  weighed 
on  the  Resurrection  Day,  but  the  attestation  of  'There  is  no  deity 
but  God'  will  not  be  weighed,  because  if  it  is  weighed  in  a  scale 
and  the  seven  heavens  and  seven  earths  and  what  is  in  then  both 
are  placed  in  another  scale,  the  scale  of  "There  is  no  deity  but 
God"  will  be  heavier.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  anybody  commits  sin 


Vol-I  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  233 

on  the  surface  of  the  earth  after  uttering  There  is  no  deity  but 
God',  God  will  forgive  him.  The  Prophet  said  :  O  Abu  Hurairah, 
tell  the  dying  man  to  attest — There  is  no  deity  but  God',  as  it 
destroys  sins.  I  said :  O  Prophet  of  God,  this  is  for  the  dying  man. 
What  are  the  rewards  for  a  man  who  is  alive  ?  The  Prophet  said  : 
He  who  utters  with  sincere  heart — There  is  no  deity  but  God' 
will  enter  Paradise.  The  Prophet  said  :  Everyone  amongst  you 
will  enter  Paradise  except  one  who  denies  it  and  turns  his  face 
from  God  like  the  turning  of  the  face  of  a  she-camel.  He  was 
asked  :  O  Prophet  of  God,  who  denies  and  turns  his  face  from 
God?  He  said  :  That  person  who  does  not  utter  There  is  no  deity 
but  God'.  Utter  much  "There  is  no  deity  but  God"  before 
hindrance  comes  between  you  and  it,  as  it  is  a  word  of  Tauhid, 
word  of  sincerity,  word  of  God  fear,  word  of  purity,  calling 
towards  truth  and  the  foundations  of  Paradise.  God  says :  Is  there 
any  reward  for  doing  (Ihsan)  good  except  good  ?  It  is  said  that 
Ihsan  of  this  world  is — 'There  is  no  deity  but  God'  and  the  Ihsan 
of  the  next  world  is  Paradise.  God  says :  Those  who  do  good  will 
get  good  reward  and  still  more.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  a  man  utters 
ten  time — "There  is  no  deity  but  God'.  He  is  single,  there  is  no 
partner  for  Him,  the  kingdom  is  His  and  praise'  is  His  and  He  is 
powerful  over  all  things."  the  reward  of  setting  free  a  slave  is 
written  for  him.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  a  man  utters  a  day  two 
hundred  times  the  above  mentioned  Doa,  nobody  will  be  able  to 
go  before  him  and  nobody  will  catch  him  after  him  except  one 
who  does  actions  better  than  those  of  his.  The  Prophet  said  :  If  a 
man  goes  to  the  market  and  utters  "There  is  no  deity  but  God,  He 
is  single,' there  is  no  partner  for  Him,  His  is  the  kingdom  and  His 
is  all  praise,  He  gives  life  and  takes  life,  He  is  powerful  over 
everything" — God  writes  for  him  one  lac  virtues,  forgives  one  lac 
sins  and  builds  for  him  a  house  in  Paradise.  The  Prophet  said :  He 
who  utter  the  aforesaid  Doa  ten  times,  will  get  the  rewards  of 
setting  free  four  slaves  belonging  to  the  dynasty  of  Hazrat  Ismail. 
The  Prophet  said  :  He  who  wakes  up  at  night  and  utter  the 
following  Doa,  is  forgiven  of  his  sins  and  if  he  prays  after 
abulution,  his  prayer  is  accepted — "There  is  no  deity  but  God,  He 
is  single,  there  is  no  partner  for  Him,  knogdom  is  His,  praise  is 
His,  and  He  is  powerful  over  all  things.  Glory  be  to  God,  all 
praise  is  due  to  God,  there  is  no  deity  but  God,  God  is  greatest, 
there  is  no  might  or  strength  except  in  God,  thegreat,  the  mighty. 
O  God  forgive  me." 


234  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

SECTION  2 

TASBIH,  TAHMID  AND  OTHER  ZIKERS 

'  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  utters  at  the  end  of  each  prayer 
'Sobhan  Allah'  thirty  three  times,  'Alham  do  Lillah'  thirty  three 
times  and  'Allaho  Akbar7  thirty  three  times  and  then  utter  once 
"There  is  no  deity  but  God,  he  is  single,  there  is  no  partner  for 
Him,  kingdom  is  His,  all  praise  is  His,  and  He  is  powerful  over  all 
things"  all  his  sins  are  forgiven  even  though  they  are 
innumerable  like  foams  in  a  sea.  (2)  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man 
utters  everydays  one  hundred  times  'Glory  be  to  God  and  all 
praise  is  his'  all  his  sins  are  forgiven  even  though  they  are 
innumerable  like  the  foams  of  a  sea.  (3)  A  man  came  to  the 
Prophet  and  said:  The  world  has  forsaken  me  and  I  have  been 
rendered  poor  and  I  am  without  means.  The  Prophet  asked  him: 
Where  do  you  stay?  Don't  you  know  the  Doa  by  the  blessings  of 
which  angels  and  men  get  livelihood?  He  said:  O  Prophet  of  God, 
what  is  that  Doa?  He  said:  After  dawn  and  before  Fajr  prayer,  if 
you  read  this  Doa  one  hundred  times,  the  world  will  itself  turn  to 
you  and  God  will  create  one  angel  from  each  of  its  words  who 
will  be  engaged  in  reading  Tasbih  up  to  the  Resurrection  Day 
and  you  will  get  its  reward:  Glory  be  to  God  with  all  praise,  Glory 
be  to  God,  the  great.  I  seek  forgiveness  of  God.  (4)  The  Prophet 
said:  When  a  servant  utters  "Alhamdo  Lillah",  he  fills  up  what  is 
between  heaven  and  earth.  When  he  recites  it  for  the  second  time, 
he  fills  up  seven  heavens  and  seven  earth.  When  he  utters  it  for 
the  third  time.  God  says:  Pray  and  it  will  be  responded  to. 

(5)  Hazrat  Refa'a  Zarki  said:  Once  we  were  praying  behind 
the  Prophet.  When  he  raised  his  head  from  bow,  he  said:  'God 
hears  one  who  praises  Him',  one  uttered  from  behind  the 
Prophet:  O  our  Lord,  Thine  is  all  praise,  innumerable  and  pure, 
full  of  blessings  therein.  When  the  Prophet  finished  his  prayer,  he 
asked:  Who  has  uttered  this  Doa  just  now?  He  said:  O  Prophet  of 
God,  I.  The  Prophet  said:  I  saw  more  than  thirty  angels 
competing  as  to  who  of  them  will  write  rewards. 

(6)  The  Prophet  said:  The  following  words  are  called 
ever-lasting  good  deeds:  There  is  no  deity  but  God.'  'Glory  be  to 
God'.  'All  praise  is  for  God'.  'Allah  is  greatest.  There  is  no  might 
or  strength  except  in  God'. 


I 


Vol-I  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  235 

(7)  The  Prophet  said:  There  is  no  such  servant  whose  sins  are 
not  forgiven  even  though  they  are  as  innumerable  as  the  foam  of 
the  sea  if  he  utters  these  words:  There  is  no  deity  but  God.  God  is 
greatest.  Glory  be  to  God.  All  praise  is  for  God  and  'There  is  no 
might  or  strength  except  in  God.' 

(8)  The  Prophet  said:  If  Zikr  is  recited  glorifying  God,  and 
Tasbih,  Tahmid  and  Takbir  are  recited,  humming  of  Voices  are 
heard  like  the  humming  of  bees  round  the  Throne.  They  make 
Zikr  along  with  them  and  nobody  among  you  ceases  to  make 
Zikr  of  God. 

(9)  The  Prophet  said:  I  recite  the  following  Doa  and  love  it 
better  than  all  the  things  upon  which  the  sun  sheds  rays:  Glory  be 
to  God,  all  praise.is  due  to  God,  'there  is  no  deity  but  God,  God  is 
greatest. 

(10)  The  Prophet  said:  To  God,  four  words  are  dear 
Sobhan-Allah,  Alhamdo-Lillah,  La  Ilaha  Wallah,  Allahu-Akbar. 
By  whichever  of  these  you  begin,  it  will  not  harm  you.  The 
Prophet  said:  'Sobhan  Allah'  is  half  of  faith,  'Alham  do  Lilian' 
fills  up  the  scale.  'Sobhan  Allah  and  Allaho  Akbar'  fill  up  what  is 
between  i.eaven  and  earth.  Prayer  is  light,  charity  is  proof, 
patience  is  radiance  and  the  Quran  is  proof  for  you  or  against 
you.  Every  man  gets  up  at  dawn  ad  either  sells  his  soul  and 
destroys  it  or  purifies  his  soul  and  frees  it. 

(1 1)  The  Prophet  said:  Two  words  are  easy  to  be  uttered  but 
heavy  in  scale  and  dear  to  the  Merciful  'Sobhan  Allah  Wa 
Behamdihi,  Sobhan  Allahul  Azim.  Abu  Zarra  said:  I  asked  the 
Prophet:  Which  word  is  dearest  to  God?  The  Prophet  said:  That 
word  which  God  selected  for  His  angels  He  quoted  the  above 
formula.  The  Prophet  said:  God  selected  this  word:  Sobhan 
Allah,  walhamdo  Lillah,  wala  Ilaha  Illallah,  wallaho  Akbar. 
When  a  man  utters  'Sobhan  Allah'  twenty  rewards  are  written  for 
him  and  twenty  sins  are  wiped  out.  When  he  utters  'Allaho 
Akbar'  similar  rewards  are  written.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man 
utters  'Sobhan  Allah  wabihamdihi,'  a  palm  tree  is  planted  for 
him  in  paradise. 

(12)  Once  the  poor  said  to  the  Prophet:  The  rich  take  the 
rewards.  They  pray  like  us  and  fast  but  they  get  rewards  from 
their  additional  properties.  He  said:  Has  not  God  enjoined  on 
you  charity?  Every  Tasbih  of  your  is  an  act  of  charity,  every 


236  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

Tahmid  and  Tahlil  are  acts  of  charity,  every  Takbir  is  an  act  of 
charity,  every  enjoining  good  and  forbidding  evil  is  an  act  of 
charity,  the  morsel  of  food  you  lift  up  to  the  mouth  of  your  wife  is 
an  act  of  charity,  your  sexual  intercourse  with  your  wife  is  an  act 
of  charity.  He  said:  O  Prophet  of  God,  does  one  of  us  coming  to 
his  wife  out  of  passion  get  rewards?  The  Prophet  said:  Don't  you 
see  that  if  he  throws  his  semen  unto  lawful  things  will  he  not 
commit  sins?  He  said:  Yes.  He  said:  Similarly  if  he  throws  it  in 
lawful  thing,  he  will  get  rewards.  Hazrat  Abu  Zarr  said:  I  asked 
the  Prophet:  The  rich  have  already  taken  rewards.  They  do 
whatever  divine  service  we  do  but  they  spend  and  we  cannot. 
The  Prophet  said:  Shall  I  not  give  you  clue  to  such  an  action 
which  if  you  do,  you  will  get  the  rewards  of  the  actions  of  those 
before  you  and  you  will  get  the  rewards  of  those  who  will  come 
after  you-33  times  'Sobhan-Allah'  at  the  end  of  each  prayer, 
'Alhamdo  Lillah'  33  times  and  'Allaho-  Akbar'  34  times.  The 
Prophet  said :  You  shall  recite  Tasbih,  Tahlil  and  Taqdis,  Don't  be 
heedless  and  count  them  with  fingers.  The  fingers  will  speak  on 
the  Resurrection  Day. 

(13)  The  Prophet  said:  When  a  man  utters  at  the  time  of  his 
death  "There  is  no  might  or  strength  except  in  God'  the  fire  of  Hell 
will  not  touch  him,  The  Prophet  said :  Will  not  some  one  of  you  gain 
one  thousand  rewards  daily?  It  was  replied :  O  Prophet  of  God,  how 
can  it  occur  ?  He  said  :  Utter  Tasbih  one  hundred  times,  then  one 
thousand  rewards  will  be  written  for  you  and  one  thousand  sins 
will  be  effaced  from  you.  The  Prophet  said :  O  Abu  Musa,  shall  I  not 
inform  you  of  a  jewel  of  Paradise  under  the  Throne  ?  He  said  :  Yes. 
He  said :  Utter-There  is  no  might  or  strength  except  in  God. 

(14)  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  utters  at  dawn  the  following, 
it  becomes  the  duty  of  God  to  please  him  on  the  Resurrection 
Day:  I  am  satisfied  with  God  as  Lord,  Islam  as  religion,  the  Quran 
as  a  guide  and  with  Muhammad  as  a  Prophet  and  Apostle. 

Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  if  you  question  that  it  is  easy  to 
utter  words  by  tongue  and  is  no  such  difficulty  in  Zikr  of  God, 
then  how  is  it  that  it  is  better  than  all  other  divine  services?  Know 
that  its  secrets  are  not  understood  except  with  the  spiritual 
knowledge.  Of  all  the  learnings  relating  to  worldly  affairs,  the 
most  profitable  and  fruitful  is  constant  Zikr  with  humility  of 
spirit.  If  the  mind  is  heedless  at  the  time  of  Zikr  with  tongue,  it 
brings  much  less  rewards,  If  there  is  no  attention  of  mind  at  the 


Vol-I  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  237 

time  of  Zikr,  there  is  little  benefit  therein,  but  constant  Zikr  with 
attention  or  at  most  times  is  above  all  other  divine  services.  This 
is  the  end  of  divine  services  regarding  actions.  There  is  beginning 
and  end  of  Zikr.  There  is  love  at  its  beginning  and  love  at  its  end. 
At  first,  a  person  feels  great  difficulty  in  turning  his  mind 
towards  God.  If  it  lasts  with  the  grace  of  God,  it  begets  love  for 
the  Beloved.  There  is  no  wonder  in  it.  For  this  habit,  he  makes 
Zikr  in  a  lonely  place  far  away  from  the  bustles  of  the  world.  Thus 
constant  Zikr  he  gets  love  towards  Him  and  so  he  loves  more  and 
more  Zikr.  Then  it  grows  into  habit.  A  wise  man  said:  I  have  been 
reading  the  Quran  for  the  last  twenty  years  and  getting  its 
blessings.  This  blessing  was  not  possible  without  I've.  This 
trouble  has  now  grown  into  habit.  Man  is  a  slave  of  habit  and  his 
habit  turns  into  his  nature  at  the  end.  When  there  is  eagerness  for 
Zikr,  he  forgets  other  things  except  God  and  it  exists  till  his  death 
God's  Zikr  will  go  with  him  in  his  grave  and  not  his  children  and 
properties.  For  this  reason,  the  Prophet  said:  The  Holy  Spirit 
infused  into  my  soul:  Love  what  you  like  but  you  shall  have  to 
give  it  up  at  the  end.  In  other  words,  sever  all  connections  with 
the  world  and  it  will  end  with  death.  Don't  deny  that  Zikr  of  God 
will  go  with  you  even  after  your  death. 

It  is  said  how  it  is  possible  when  there  is  the  end  of  a  man 
after  his  death?  There  is  no  end  of  man  after  his  death,  so  there  is 
no  end  of  Zikr.  He  goes  from  the  outside  world  and  enters  into 
spiritual  world  just  as  a  child  comes  out  of  its  mother's  womb 
and  falls  into  this  world.  The  Prophet  hined  at  it  by  saying:  Grave 
is  a  hole  of  Hell  or  a  garden  of  Paradise.  The  Prophet  said:  The 
souls  of  martyrs  lie  in  the  wombs  of  green  birds.  Addressing  the 
polythiests  by  names,  the  Prophet  said:  O  such  person,  O  such 
person,  have  you  found  true  what  your  Lord  has  promised  you?  I 
have  found  true  what  my  Lord  has  promised  me.  Hazrat  Omar 
asked  the  Prophet:  O  Prophet  of  God,  when  they  have  become 
dead,  how  can  they  hear  and  how  can  they  reply?  The  Prophet 
said:  By  One  in  whose  hand  there  is  my  life,  you  do  not  hear  my 
words  better  than  them,  but  they  cannot  reply.  The  Prophet  said: 
The  soul  of  the  believers  and  the  martyr  remain  with  in  the  bellies 
of  green  birds  hanging  under  the  Throne' .  So  the  existence  of  Zikr 
cannot  be  refused  from  the  hearts  of  the  above  persons.  God  says: 
Don't  think  those  who  are  martyred  in  the  way  of  God  as  dead 
but  they  are  alive  before  their  lord  and  they  are  given  provision. 
They  remain  satisfied  with  what  God  has  given  them  and  give 


238  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

good  news  to  those  who  could  not  earn  that'.  They  get  the  honour 
of  martyrdom  on  account  of  the  honour  of  God's  Zikr  as  their 
object  is  death  in  good  condition  and  they  return  to  God  after 
renouncing  the  world.  Their  thought  are  for  the  sake  of  God  and 
they  become  prepared  for  real  life  after  giving  up  his  children 
and  properties. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  MARTYRDOM:  There  are  many 
traditions  regarding  the  excellence  of  martyrdom,  some  of  which 
have  been  narrated  below.  When  Abdullah-b-Ansari  was 
martyred  at  the  battle  of  Uhud,  the  Prophet  said  to  his  son  Jaber: 

0  Jaber,  shall  I  not  give  you  good  news?  He  said:  Yes,  may  God 
give  you  news  of  good.  He  said:  God  has  given  your  father  life 
and  kept  him  seated  near  Him  and  there  is  now  no  screen 
between  him  and  God.  God  said  to  him:  O  My  servant  pray  to  Me 
whatever  you  wish.  I  will  give  it  to  you.  He  said:  O  God,  if  Thou 
wiseth,  send  me  again  to  the  world  till  I  am  martyred  for  thee  and 
for  Thy  Prophet.  God  said:  Order  has  gone  from  Me  that  a  dead 
man  cannot  return'.  To  be  martyred  in  this  condition  is  his  death 
in  good  condition,  because  if  he  would  not  have  been  a  martyr 
and  livedfor  sometime,  sweetness  of  the  world  would  have 
returned  to  him  and  it  would  have  diverted  his  mind  from  the 
remembrance  of  God.  For  this  reason,  the  greatest  fear  of  a  God 
fearing  man  is  at  the  time  of  his  death,  as  mind  may  change  at  that 
time  even  if  Zikr  of  God  keeps  attached  to  it.  One  dies  in  the 
condition  in  which  he  ends  his  life  and  his  resurrection  takes 
place  in  that  condition.  Thus  the  mind  of  a  martyr  becomes 
prepared  only  for  God  after  all  connections  with  the  world  are  cut 
off.  Hence  the  reward  of  martyrdom  is  greatest.  Every  object  of 
desire  is  deity  and  every  deity  is  an  object  of  worship.  When  a 
martyr  has  got  no  object  of  desire  except  Him,  he  says  by  the  tongue 
of  condition  There  is  no  diet  but  God.'  He  who  utters  this  by  his 
tongue  but  his  condition  does  not  help  him,  his  affair  is  upon  God 
and  he  can't  be  safe  from  harm.  For  this  reason  the  Prophet  gave 
superiority  to  There  is  no  deity  but  God'  to  other  Zikrs.  Whoever 
likes  to  meet  with  God.  He  also  likes  to  meet  him  and  whoever  does 
not  like  to  meet  wit  Him,  God  also  does  not  want  to  meet  him.  This 
is  the  secret  of  Zikr. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  DOA  AND  RULES 

God  says:  When  My  servant  asks  of  Me  to  you,  say:  I  am  near. 

1  respond  to  one  who  calls  Me  when  he  calls  Me.  So  invoke  Me. 


Vol-I  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  239 

God  says:  Invoke  God  with  modesty  and  secretly.  He  does  not 
love  the  transgressors  as  God  says:  Call  Me,  I  will  respond  to  you. 
Those  who  refrain  from  My  remembrance  out  of  vanity  will  enter 
Hell  abased.  God  says  :  Say  :  God  has  got  good  names  by 
whatever  names  you  call  Him-Allah  or  Rahman.  The  Prophet 
said:  Monazat  is  divine  service.  Then  he  recited:  Call  Me,  I  will 
respond  to  you.  The  Prophet  said:  Monazat  is  the  narrow  of 
worship.  He  said:  There  is  nothing  more  honourable  than 
Monazat.  The  Prophet  said:  Let  no  man  forget  to  invoke  either  of 
these  three  things-forgiveness  of  his  sins,  hastnening  of  good  for 
him  or  preserving  good  for  him.  The  Prophet  said:  Seek  favour  of 
God,  as  He  loves  invocation.  The  best  worship  is  to  wait  for 
compulsory  prayer. 

TEN  RULES  OF  INVOCATION 

(1)  Choose  the  best  time  for  invocation,  for  instance  on  the 
day  of  Arafat,  in  the  month  of  Ramzan,  on  the  Jumma  Day  and 
the  last  portion  of  the  night.  God  says:  They  seek  forgiveness  by 
the  latter  part  of  the  night.  The  Prophet  said:  God  descends  every 
night  at  its  last  one  third  portion  in  the  heaven  of  the  earth  and 
says:  Who  will  invoke  Me  that  I  may  accept  his  invocation?  Who 
will  seek  from  Me  that  I  may  accept  his  prayers?  Who  will  seek 
forgiveness  from  Me  that  I  may  forgive  him.  Hazrat  Eakub  used 
to  make  prayer  with  his  children  for  forgiveness  in  the  after  part 
of  the  night  standing  in  prayer.  God  then  said  to  him:  I  will 
forgive  them  and  make  them  Prophets. 

(2)  To  take  advantage  of  honourable  condition.  Hazrat 
Abu  Hurairah  said:  The  doors  of  heaven  are  opened  in  Juha  in 
the  way  of  God,  at  the  time  of  concourse  of  men  in  rows  of 
prayer,  at  the  time  of  rain  fall  and  at  the  time  of  Aqamat  of 
compulsory  prayer.  Invoke  at  that  time.  Muzahed  said  :  You 
should  invoke  at  the  end  of  prayer.  The  Prophet  said  : 
Invocation  is  not  rejected  in  between  Azan  and  Aqamat.  He 
said  :  'The  invocation  of  a  fasting  man  is  not  rejected.'  The  best 
times  are  the  time  of  Sheri,  purity  of  mind  and  sincerity,  the 
day  of  Arafat,  the  time  of  prostration.  The  Prophet  said  :  A  man 
becomes  near  God  at  the  time  of  prostration.  Invoke  much  at 
that  time.  The  Prophet  said  :  I  have  been  prohibited  to  read  the 
Quran  in  Ruku  and  prostration.  Proclaim  the  glory  of  God  in 
Ruku  and  take  trouble  of  invoking  in  prostration,  as  it  is  the 
appropriate  time  of  its  acceptance. 


240  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

(3)  Invoke  facing  the  Qibla  and  raise  up  your  hand  so  high  that 
the  whiteness  of  the  hand  is  visible.  It  is  stated  that  the  Prophet 
waited  facing  the  KaTja  on  the  Arafat  Day  and  kept  on  invoking  till 
the  sun  set.  The  Prophet  said :  Your  Lord  is  bashful  and  honourable. 
Whenever  anybody  raises  up  his  hands.  He  feels  shy  to  return  in 
empty  handed.  Hazrat  Anas  reported  that  the  Prophet  used  to  raise 
up  his  hands  so  high  that  the  whiteness  of  his  hands  could  be  seen. 
Once  the  Prophet  saw  as  man  making  invocation  and  hinting  by  his 
two  fingers.  He  said  :  one,  one.  He  hinted  to  make  it  short.  Hazrat 
Omar  said  that  the  Prophet  extended  his  hands  and  did  not  take 
them  down  until  he  touched  his  face  with  them.  Hazrat  Ibn  Abbas 
said  that  whenever  the  Prophet  invoked,  he  united  the  front  potion 
of  his  hands  and  rubbed  his  face  with  the  interior  of  his  palms.  The 
Prophet  said :  Let  not  the  people  look  towards  the  sky  at  the  time  of 
invocation  or  shut  up  their  sight. 

(4)  Keep  your  voice  between  expression  and  silence.  Hazrat 
Abu  Musa  Ash'ari  said  :  When  we  came  near  Medina  with  the 
Prophet,  he  recited  Takbir  and  the  people  also  recited  Takbir 
Loudly.  The  Prophet  said  :  O  people,  He  whom  you  call  is  not 
deaf  and  not  absent.  He  whom  you  call  is  between  you  and  your 
necks.  Hazrat  Ayesha  said  :  God  says  :  Don't  raise  your  voice 
high  in  prayer,  nor  keep  it  concealed.  God  praised  His  Prophet 
Zakariyah  when  he  called  his  Lord  by  silent  voice. 

(5)  Don't  use  ornamental  words  in  invocation.  He  who  invokes 
should  be  humble.  The  Prophet  said  :  Soon  a  people  appear  who 
will  exaggerate  in  invocation  God  says  :  He  does  not  love  the 
transgressors.  This  is  in  reference  to  those  who  use  ornamental 
words  in  invocation.  Pray  for  what  is  good.  The  Prophet  said :  Give 
up  ornamental  words  in  invocation.  It  is  said  that  the  learned  and 
Abdals  used  not  more  than  seven  words  in  their  invocation. 

(6)  Invoke  with  fear  and  hope  and  with  humility  and 
modesty.  Humility  and  modesty  are  dear  to  God.  God  says :  They 
hasten  in  good  deeds  and  invoke  Me  with  hope  and  fear.  The 
P'ophet  said  :  If  God  loves  a  man.  He  tries  him  till  he  sees  in  him 
humility  and  modesty. 

(7)  Believe  that  your  invocation  will  be  accepted  and  hope 
therein  for  truth.  The  Prophet  said :  When  a  man  invokes,  let  him 
not  say :  O  God,  give  me  if  Thou  wiseth.  Be  firm  in  invocation  as 
there  is  nobody  to  reject  it.  The  Prophet  said  :  When  one  of  you 


1 


Vol-I  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  241 

invokes,  make  your  hope  great  as  there  is  nothing  great  to  God. 
The  Prophet  said  :  Invoke  God  and  entertain  a  firm  belief  that 
your  invocation  will  be  accepted  and  know  that  God  does  not 
accept  the  invocation  of  a  headless  man.  Sufiyan  Saori  said  :  Let 
nobody  prevent  you  to  make  invocation  with  what  you  know  as 
God  accepted  the  invocation  of  the  worst  being  of  the  creation, 
the  devil.  When  he  prayed  :  O  God,  give  me  respite  up  to  the 
Resurrection  day.  God  said :  Your  prayer  is  accepted. 

(8)  Invoke  firmly  three  times.  Hazrat  Ibn  Masud  said: 
Whenever'  the  Prophet  invoked,  he  invoked  thrice.  Don't  be 
hasty  to  see  your  invocation  accepted  as  the  Prophet  said:  The ' 
invocation  of  any  of  you  is  accepted  if  not  sought  hastily.  Don't 
say,  1  invoked'  but  it  has  not  been  accepted.  When  you  invoke, 
invoke  too  much,  as  you  are  invoking  to  the  Merciful.  A  certain 
wise  man  said:  I  have  been  invoking  God  for  the  last  twenty  years 
but  He  is  not  accepting  my  invocation,  yet  I  hope,  my  invocation 
will  be  accepted.  The  Prophet  said:  When  any  of  you  prays  to  his 
Lord  and  gets  sign  of  its  acceptance,  let  him  say:  All  praise  is  due 
to  God  under  all  circumstances. 

(9)  Begin  invocation  with  Zikr  of  God.  Don't  invoke  at  the 
start.  Hazrat  Salma  said:  I  did  never  see  the  Prophet  invoking 
without  first  saying:  Sobhana  Rabbial  Ula  wal  wahhab.  Abu 
Solaiman  Darani  said:  If  a  man  wishes  to  invoke  God  for  any 
necessity,  let  him  begin  with  blessings  on  the  Prophet  and  then 
pray  end  and  then  end  it  witt\  such  blessing  as  God  accepts  the 
invocation  of  those  who  send  blessing  on  Prophet.  The  Prop*het 
said:  When  you  invoke  God  for  any  necessity,  begin  it  after 
blessings  on  me  as  the  Merciful  God  fulfills  one  of  the  two 
honoured  necessities  and  reject  another. 

(10)  Observe  the  internal  manners  and  if  is  the  root  of 
acceptance  of  Tauba,  means  of  preventing  oppression,  means  to 
seek  nearess  to  God  and  a  near  cause  of  acceptance  of  invocation, 
Ka'ba-b-Ashab  narrated  that  there  was  a  great  famine" over  the 
people  at  the  time  of  Moses.  He  came  out  with  the  children  of 
Israil  for  invoking  for  rain  but  it  did  not  come.  Then  God  revealed 
to  Moses:  I  will  accept  not  your  invocation  and  the  invocation  of 
your  companions  as  there  is  a  back-biter  amongst  you.  Moses 
asked:  Who  is  that  man?  We  shall  eject  him  from  our  company  God 
revealed  to  him:  O  Moses,  I  have  prohibited  you  back-biting..Hdw 
shall  I  be  a  back-biter?  Then  Moses  said  to  the  children  of  Israil: 


242  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

Make  repentance  for  back-biting  and  return  to  your  Lord:  They 
all  repented.  Then  God  sent  down  rain  upon  them. 

The  sage  Sufiyan  Saori  said:  I  have  come  to  know  that  the 
children  of  Israil  suffered  famine  for  seven  years,  even  they 
began  to  eat  dead  animals  and  young  children.  God  sent 
revelation  to  their  Prophet:  If  you  come  to  Me  walking  on  foot 
and  enliven  your  tongues  by  invoking  Me,  I  will  not  accept  your 
invocations  and  will  not  show  kindness  at  your  cries  till  you  pay 
compensation  to  those  whom  you  have  oppressed.  They  did  so 
and  there  was  rain  upon  them. 

Malek-b-Dinar  said:  There  was  once  a  famine  over  the 
children  of  Israil.  They  came  out  several  times  invoking  for  rain. 
God  then  revealed  to  their  Prophet:  Inform  them  that  they  have 
come  to  Me  with  impure  bodies  and  unlawful  food  in  their  lies 
and  they  raised  the  fronts  of  their  hands  which  shed  unlawful 
blood.  My  wrath  upon  them  is  therefore  great. 

Once  Hazrat  Solaiman  came  out  invoking  for  rain.  At  that 
time  an  ant  raised  up  its  leg  towards  the  sky  and  said:  O  God,  we 
are  Thy  creation  and  we  have  got  necessity  of  provision.  Don't 
destroy  us  for  the  sins  of  others.  Then  Solaiman  said  to  the 
people:  Go,  you  will  get  rain  as  a  result  of  the  invocation  of  others 
than  you.  Once  Jesus  Christ  came  out  invoking  for  rain.  He  said 
to  the  people:  Let  the  transgressors  go  out  of  this  assembly.  None 
but  one  remained  with  him  Jesus  asked  him:  Have  you  got  no 
sin?  He  said:  By  God,  I  don't  know  anything.  One  day  I  was 
praying  when  a  woman  was  passing  by  me  and  I  had  a  glance  at 
her.  When  she  went  away,  I  plucked  out  me  eyes.  Jesus  said  to 
him:  Invoke  God  for  acceptance.  Then  he  invoked  and  there  came 
down  heavy  shower  of  rain. 

Hazrat  Ata  stated  that  when  he  came  out  one  day  for  praying 
for  rain,  he  saw  a  mad  man  near  a  burial  ground.  The  mad  man 
prayed  and  owing  to  his  prayer  there  was  profuse  rain.  Then  the 
made  man  recited  these  poems :- 

The  ascetics  and  worshipers  have  found  guidance, 
For  their  Lord,  they  keep  their  bellies  hungry,. 
Their  eyes  remain  awake  being  pressed  by  love. 
They  spend  the  whole  night  without  sleep. 
In  meditation  and,  divine  services  of  thejr  Lord. 
But  the  people  think  them  fools  and  mad. 


Vol-I  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  243 

EXCELLENCE  OF  DARUD  OR  BLESSINGS 
ON  PROPHET 

God  says:  God  and  His  angels  send  blessings  upon  the 
Prophet.  O  those  who  believe,  send  blessings  on  him  and  Salam. 
It  has  been  narrated  that  the  Prophet  said  being  satisfied:  Gebriel  ■ 
came  to  me  and  said:  O  Muhammad,  are  you  not  satisfied  that  if 
one  of  your  followers  sends  one  blessing  upon  you,  I  send  ten 
blessings  upon  him  and  if  he  sends  one  salaam  on  you,  I  send  on 
him  ten  salams.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  sends  blessings  on  me, 
the  angels  send  blessings  on  him.  So  increase  or  reduce  blessings 
on  me  at  the  time  of  sending  it.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  sends 
much  blessings  on  me  is  best  to  me.  He  said:  It  is  sufficient 
miserliness  on  the  part  of  a  believer  that  if  I  am  mentioned  to  him, 
he  does  not  send  blessings  on  me.  The  Prophet  said:  Send  much 
blessing  on  me  on  the  Jumma  Day.  He  said:  If  a  man  among  my 
followers  sends  one  blessing  on  me  ten  rewards  are  written  for 
him  and  his  ten  sins  are  forgiven.  He  said:  If  a  man  utters  after 
hearing  Azan  and  Aqamtat  "O  God,  Lord  of  this  perfect 
invitation  and  lasting  prayer,  send  blessings  on  Muhammad,  Thy 
servant  and  Thy  Apostle  and  give  him  means,  excellence  and 
high  position  and  intercession  on  the  Resurrection  Day",  it 
becomes  incumbent  on  me  to  intercede  for  him.  The  Prophet  said: 
If  a  man  glorifies  me  by  writing  books,  the  angels  pray  to  God  for 
his  forgiveness  till  the  book  exists.  He  said:  If  a  man  sends  salam 
on  me,  God  sends  his  salam  to  me  and  I  respond  to  his  salam.  He 
was  asked:  O  Prophet  of  God,  how  shall  we  send  blessings  on 
you?  He  said:  Say,  O  God,  send  blessings  on  Muhammad,  Thy 
servant,  and  upon  his  family  and  wives  and  descendants  as  Thou 
hast  sent  blessings  on  Abraham  and  upon  the  family  of  Abraham. 
And  give  abundance  to  Muhammad,  his  wives  and  descendants 
as  Thou  hast  given  abundance  to  Abraham  and  the  family  of 
Abraham.  Thou  art  the  Most  praised  and  glorified. 

After  the  death  of  the  Prophet,  Hazrat  Omar  began  to  weep 
and  said:  O  Prophet  of  God,  my  parents  be  sacrificed  to  you.  You 
used  to  deliver  sermon  to  the  people  standing  on  a  wood  of 
grape.  When  there  were  large  numbers  of  people,  you  have  taken 
a  pulpit  to  make  them  hear  but  the  wood  began  to  tremble  at  your 
separation.  It  became  quiet  when  you  placed  your  hand  on  it.  At 
the  battle  of  Hunain,  your  followers  were  innumerable  but  they 
became  attached  to  you.  May  my  parents  be  sacrificed  to  thee.  O 


244  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

Prophet  of  God,  your  excellence  has  reached  God  as  God  will  be 
obeyed  if  you  are  obeyed.  God  says:  He  who  obeys  the  Apostle  of 
God  obeys  God.  O  Apostle  of  God,  may  my  parents  be  sacrificed 
to  you,  your  excellence  has  reached  God.  He  gave  you  the  news 
of  pardon  before  the  news  of  sin.  For  that  God  says:  God  has 
forgiven  you  for  what  you  enjoin  them. 

O  Prophet  of  God,  my  parents  be  sacrificed  to  you.  Your 
excellence  has  reached  God.  He  sent  you  as  the  last  Prophet  but 
He  described  you  before  all.  For  that  He  says:  When  I  took 
covenant  from  you  and  the  Prophets  etc.  O  Prophet  of  God,  may 
my  parents  be  sacrificed  to  you,  your  excellence  has  reached 
God.  The  dwellers  of  Hell  will  wish  how  good  it  would  have  been 
if  they  had  obeyed  you.  When  they  will  receive  punishment  in 
different  stages  of  Hell,  they  will  say:  Alas,  had  we  obeyed  god 
and  His  Apostle! 

O  Apostle  of  God,  may  my  parents  be  sacrified  to  you.  Moses, 
son  of  Imran,  made  to  flow  a  stream  of  water  from  a  stone.  Is  it 
not  more  wonderful  that  water  flowed  down  from  your  fingers? 
O  Prophet  of  God,  may  my  parents  be  sacrified  to  you.  God  made 
the  wind  subservient  to  Solaiman.  He  went  one  month's  journey 
at  dawn  and  one  month's  journey  at  dusk.  Is  it  not  more 
wonderful  than  the  above  that  you  travelled  one  night  riding  on 
a  Buraq  the  seven  heavens  and  said  prayer  at  the  Ka'ba  the  same 
very  night?  O  Prophet  of  God,  may  my  parent  be  sacrificed  to 
you.  God  gave  miracle  to  Jesus  Christ,  son  of  Mary,  to  make  a 
dead  man  alive.  Is  it  not  more  wonderful  than  it  that  cooked 
mutton  mixed  wit  poison  spoke  with  you?  Don't  eat  me.  I  have 
got  poison  mixed  with  me. 

O  Prophet  of  God,  may  my  parent  be  sacrificed  to  you.  Noah 
prayed  to  God  about  his  people:  O  my  Lord,  don't  leave  a  single 
house  of  the  unbelievers  in  the  world.  If  you  had  prayed  against 
us  in  a  similar  manner,  we  would  have  been  destroyed.  Your 
back  was  burdened,  your  front  teeth  were  martyred,  yet  you  did 
not  invoke  against  them  but  for  good  and  said:  O  God,  forgive 
my  people,  as  they  know  not  what  they  do. 

O  Prophet  of  God,  may  my  parents  be  sacrificed  to  you.  Noah 
was  not  followed  by  so  many  people  during  his  long  stray  as  you 
have  been  followed  in  a  short  time.  Innumerable  people  believed 
you.  O  Prophet  of  God,  may  my  parents  be  sacrificed  to  you,  if 


Vol-I  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  245 

you  had  not  permitted  people  lower  in  rank  than  you  to  come  to 
you,  we  could  not  have  taken  seat  with  you.  If  you  had  not 
married  women  except  those  of  equal  rank  with  you,  we  would 
have  no  connection  with  you.  If  you  had  not  taken  meal  except 
with  the  people  of  equal  rank  with  you,  we  could  not  get  the 
honour  of  taking  food  with  you.  By  God,  you  kept  company  with 
us,  married  in  our  families,  put  on  sufi  dress,  rode  on  asses,  took 
companions  behind,  ate  in  cups  of  earth  and  licked  your  hands 
after  eating. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  ISTIGFAR  OR    • 
SEEKING  FORGIVENESS 

God  says:  When  they  do  obscene  acts  or  oppression  on  their 
souls,  they  remember  God  and  seek  forgiveness  for  their  sins. 
Hazrat  Abdullah-b-Masud  said:  There  are  two  verses  in  the 
Quran.  If  a  man  recites  them  after  committing  a  sin  and  seeks 
forgiveness  to  God.  God  forgives  him.  God  says:  He  who  does  an 
evil  or  oppreses  on  his  soul  and  then  seeks  forgiveness  to  God,  he 
will  find  Him  forgiving  and  merciful.  God  says:  Glorify  your 
Lord  and  seek  forgiveness  to  Him.  He  accepts  repentance.  God 
says:  Those  who  seek  forgiveness  by  the  latter  part  of  night  etc. 
The  Prophet  used  often  to  say:  Thou  art  pure  with  Thy  praise, 
Thou  doth  accept  repentance,  Thou  art  merciful.  The  Prophet 
said:  If  a  man  seeks  forgiveness  much,  God  gives  him  solace  in 
every  trouble,  makes  his  narrow  space  wide  and  gives  him 
provision  beyond  his  conception.  The  Prophet  said:  I  seek 
forgiveness  to  God  and  I  make  repentance  to  Him  72  times  every 
day.  He  used  to  do  it  inspite  of  his  past  and  future  sins  being 
forgiven.  The  Prophet  said:  Consolation  does  not  come  to  my 
mind  till  I  seek  forgiveness  one  hundred  times  a  days.  The 
Prophet  said:  If  a  man  recites  thrice  the  following  at  the  time  of 
going  to  bed,  God  forgives  his  sins  even  though  they  are 
innumerable  like  the  foams  of  the  sea,  or  like  sands  in  a  desert,  or 
like  leaves  in  a  tree  or  like  the  days  of  the  world  'I  seek 
forgiveness  to  God  the  Greatest,  there  is  no  deity  but  He,  the 
living,  the  every  subsisting  and  I  turn  to  him  penitently." 

The  Prophet  said:  The  sins  of  one  who  utters  it  are  forgiven 
even  though  he  flees  away  from  Jihad.  Hazrat  Ayesha  said:  The 
Prophet  said  to  me:  If  you  are  attributed  any  guilt  of  sin,  seek 
forgiveness  to  God,  make  repentance  to  Him,  be  penitent  and 
seek  forgiveness  from  sin.  The  Prophet  used  to  say  about 


246  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

forgiveness:  O  God,  forgive  me  of  my  sins,  my  ignorance,  my 
extravagance  and  what  you  know  of  me.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a 
man  commits  a  sin  and  then  prays  two  ra'kats  of  prayer  with 
ablution  and  then  seeks  forgiveness  to  God,  God  forgives  his  sin. 
The  Prophet  said:  When  a  believer  commits  a  sin,  a  black  spot 
falls  in  his  heart.  If  he  is  repentant,  returns  and  seeks  forgiveness, 
it  is  wiped  out  of  his  heart.  If  the  sin  increase,  the  black  spot 
increases.  At  last  his  heart  becomes  enveloped  with  black  spots. 
This  is  'Ran'  which  has  been  spoken  of  by  God  in  this  verse: 
Never,  rather  rust  (Ran)  has  fallen  in  their  hearts  for  what  they 
have  done.  Then  the  Prophet  said:  God  created  ranks  in  Paradise 
for  His  servants.  He  says:  O  Lord,  is  this  rank  for  me?  God  says: 
This  is  your  reward  for  prayer  of  your  son.  the  Prophet  said:  O 
God,  include  me  among  those  who  receive  good  news  when  they 
do  good  deeds  and  seek  forgiveness  when  they  do  evils.  The 
Prophet  said:  When  a  servant  commits  a  sin  and  says:  O  God 
forgive  me,  God  says:  My  servant  has  committed  a  sin  and  he 
knows  that  his  Lord  will  punish  him  and  so  he  seeks  forgiveness 
for  it  and  works  for  My  pleasure,  I  forgive  him.  The  Prophet  said: 
If  a  man  did  no  virtuous  act  during  his  life  but  he  looks  towards 
sky  and  says:  O  Lord,  I  have  got  my  Lord,  forgive  me,  God  says:  I 
have  forgiven  you.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  commits  a  sin  and 
then  understands  that  God  is  seeking  him,  he  is  forgiven  though 
he  does  not  seek  forgiveness.  The  Prophet  said:  God  says:  O  My 
servant,  all  are  sinners  except  one  whom  I  forgive.  So  seek 
forgiveness  to  Me,  I  shall  forgive  you.  One  who  understands  that 
1  have  got  power  to  forgive,  I  forgive  him  without  care.  The 
Prophet  said:  If  one  says:  O  God,  I  have  oppressed  my  soul  and  I 
have  done  evil,  forgive  me,  there  is  none  to  forgive  except  Thee, 
God  forgives  him  even  though  his  sins  are  innumerable  as  ants. 
The  best  Doa  of  forgiveness  is  this:- 

O  God,  Thou  art  my  Lord  and  I  am  Thy  slave.  Thou  hast 
created  me.  I  am  upon  Thy  covenant  as  far  as  possible.  I  seek 
.  refuge  to  Thee  from  the  evils  Thou  created.  I  turn  to  Thee  with  the 
gifts  Thou  hast  bestowed  on  me.  I  turn  to  my  soul  with  my  sins.  I 
admit  my  sins.  So  forgive  my  sins.  I  admit  my  sins.  So  forgive  my 
past  and  future  sins.  None  can  forgive  sins  except  Thou. 

SAYINGS  OF  SAGES 

Hazrat  Khaled-b-Madan  said:  God  says:  The  dearest  of  My 
servants  to  Me  are  those  who  love  one  another  for  My  sake, 


Vol-I  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  247 

whose  hearts  keep  attached  to  mosques,  who  seek  forgiveness  at 
the  latter  part  of  night.  I  remember  them  when  the  inhabitants  of 
the  world  want  their  punishment  and  turn  it  back  from  them. 
Hazrat  AH  said:  It  is  a  wonder  that  one  is  destroyed  even  if  he  has  - 
got  means  of  salvation.  He  was  questioned:  What  is  it?  He  said: 
To  seek  forgiveness.  He  also  said:  God  forgives  one  for  search  of 
forgiveness  even  though  He  wishes  to  punish  him.  The  sage 
Fuzail  said:  Seeking  forgiveness  without  giving  up  sins  is  the 
Tauba  of  the  transgressors.  The  sage  Abu  Abdullah  said:  If  your 
sins  are  so  innumerable  as  the  drop  of  water  and  like  the  foams  of 
sea,  they  will  be  forgiven  if  you  invoke  God  with  a  penitent  and 
sincere  heart  with  the  following:  O  God,  I  seek  forgiveness  to 
Thee  from  every  sin  etc. 

SECTION  3 

SELECTED  INVOCATIONS 

The  Prophet  used  to  pray  after  morning  prayer:  O  God,  I  seek 
mercy  from  Thee,  such  mercy  with  which  Thou  wilt  guide  my 
mind,  unite  my  virtues  in  me,  remove  my  dangers  and 
difficultes,  adorn  my  religion,  protect  my  things  in  my  absence, 
purify  my  actions,  make  my  face  bright,  my  path  radiant  and 
protect  me  from  all  evils.  O  God,  give  me  true  faith,  such  a  faith 
after  which  no  infidelity  will  last,  such  a  mercy  with  which  I  can 
acquire  the  honour  of  Thy  glory  both  in  this  world  and  in  the 
next-uptotheend. 

Invocation  of  Hazrat  Ayesha:  She  said:  The  Prophet  advised 
me  to  invoke  with  the  fallowing:  O  God,  I  seek  from  Thee  good, 
sooner  or  latter,  known  or  unknown.  I  seek  refuge  to  Thee  from 
all  evils.  I  seek  from  Thee  paradise  and  the  actions  leading  to  it, 
sooner  of  latter,  known  or  unknown.  I  seek  refuge  to  Thee  from 
Hell  and  the  actions  leading  to  it,  sooner  or  latter,  known  or 
unknown.  I  seek  from  Thee  good  with  which  Thy  servant  and 
Apostle  Muhammad  seeks  good  from  Thee. 

Invocation  of  Hazrat  Abu  Bakr:  The  Prophet  instructed  him 
to  invoke  with  the  following:  O  God,  I  pray  to  Thee  by  the  help  of 
Thy  Apostle  Muhammad,  Thy  friend  Abraham,  Moses  with 
whom  Thou  spoke,  Thy  word  and  Spirit  Jesus  Christ,  the  Torah 
of  Moses,  Injil  of  Jesus,  Jabur  of  David  and  the  Quran  of 
Muhammad  (peace  be  on  all)-up  to  the  end. 


248  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  Vol-I 

Invocation  of  Qabisah:  The  Prophet  instructed  Qabisah  to 
invoke  in  his  old  age  after  morning  prayer  and  to  recite  it  thrice: 
Glory  be  to  God  and  all  praise  is  His,  Glory  be  to  the  great  God. 
There  is  no  might  and  power  except  in  God,  the  great,  the 
mighty..  The  Prophet  said:  When  you  invoke  therewith,  you  will 
be  safe  from  anxieties,  troubles,  diseases  and  tuberculosis. 
Regarding  your  next  world,  invoke  with  this:  O  God,  guide  me 
from  Thy  guidance,  show  me  favour  from  Thy  favour,  show  me 
mercy  from  Thy  mercy  and  shower  on  me  Thy  blessing. 

Invocation  of  Prophet  Abraham:  O  God,  this  a  new  creation. 
Open  it  on  me  on  account  of  my  allegiance  to  Thee  and  end  it 
with  Thy  pardon  and  pleasure.  Give  me  rewards  therein  and 
accept  it  from  me.  Purify  it,  make  it  weak  for  me  and  forgive  me 
the  evils  I  commit  in  it.  Thou  art  forgiving,  merciful,  magnificent 
and  beloved. 

Invocation  of  Prophet  Jesus  Christ:  O  God,  I  have  risen  at 
dawn.  I  am  unable  to  remove  what  I  dislike,  I  am  unable  to  get 
benefit  of  what  I  like.  Affairs  are  in  Thy  hand,  but  I  rise  at  dawn 
by  mortgage  of  my  actions  O  God,  there  is  none  more  needy  than 
me.  O  God,  let  not  my  enemy  be  glad  over  me,  let  not  my  friend 
think  bad  of  me.  Don't  give  trouble  in  my  religion,  don't  make 
my  eaTthly  anxiety  great  and  don't  entrust  me  to  those  who  will 
not  show  kindness  on  me,  O  Ever  living,  Eternal. 

Invocation  of  Khizr:  In  the  name  of  God,  with  the  will  of  God, 
there  is  no  might  and  strength  except  in  God  and  what  He  wills. 
Every  gift  is  from  God  what  He  wills.  All  good  is  in  His  hand 
what  He  wills.  Nobody  but  God  removes  evils. 

Invocation  of  Prophet  Adam:  O  God,  Thou  knowest  my 
secret  and  open  matters,  so  accept  my  excuse.  Thou  knowest 
my  necessities,  so  accept  my  invocation.  Thou  knowest  what  is 
in  my  mind.  So  forgive  my  sins.  O  God,  I  seek  from  Thee  faith 
giving  good  news  to  my  mind  and  true  sure  faith  till  I  know 
that  nothing  may  afflict  me  except  what  Thou  hast  recorded 
against  me  and  what  Thou  hast  allotted  to  me,  O  possessor  of 
glory  and  honour. 


CHAPTER  X 

DIVISION  OF  TIMES  FOR  ACTIONS 

God  has  made  the  world  subsevient  to  men  not  to  live  in  its 
elevated  places  but  to  gather  provision  there  from  sufficient  for 
their  permanent  abode,  sufficient  for  rewards  of  their  souls,  so 
that  they  may  save  themselves  from  deceits  and  deceptions  of  the 
world.  All  men  are  travelling  in  this  world.  Their  first  abode  is 
cradle  and  last  abode  is  grave  and  their  real  abode  is  Paradise  or 
Hell  The  term  of  life  is  noting  but  the  distance  of  journey.  Its 
every  year  is  a  station,  every  month  is  a  furlong,  every  day  is  a 
mile,  every  breath  is  a  step.  Its  religious  action  is  a  wealth  and  its 
time  is  the  root  of  its  wealth.  Its  temptations  and  greeds  are 
tumbling  block  in  its  path,  its  profit  is  vision  of  God  in  the  abode 
of  peace  and  its  loss  is  to  be  distant  from  Him  and  to  stay  in  the 
lowest  depth  of  Hell  being  tied  up  with  chains.  He  who  is 
indifferent  to  his  breaths  will  be  so  sorry  on  the  Reurrection  Day 
that  there  will  be  no  limit  to  it.  That  is  the  time  for  the  greatest 
dangers  and  dreadful  questions.  For  that  the  friends  of  God  give 
up  the  comforts  and  pleasures  of  the  transient  life  of  the  world 
and  remain  engaged  day  and  night  in  divine  services  after 
division  of  times,  so  that  they  may  earn  the  nearness  of  God  and 
live  in  comforts  in  the  day  of  the  grea  test  d  an  ger . 

EXCELLENCE  OF  DIVINE  SERVICE  BY 
DIVISION  OF  TIME 

Know,  O  dear  readers,  that  there  is  no  salvation  without 
meeting  with  God.  The  only  means  to  meet  Him  is  to  face  death 
being  imbued  with  love  for  Him.  Love  is  the  fruit  of  constant 
remembrance  of  the  Beloved  and  to  work  with  that  end  in  view. 
One  can  get  acquaintance  with  Him  if  one  thinks  constantly  of 
Hi,  His  attributes,  His  wonderful  creations  and  that  there  is  no 
existence  of  any  thing  apart  from  His  existence.  It  does  not 
become  easy  if  one  does  not  give  up  the  world  except  what  is 
necessary  for  him.  Nothing  is  fulfilled  if  time  is  not  divided  and 
divine  services  are  not  done  according  to  fixed  times.  So  divide 
time  in  to  several  divisions.  If  a  man  spends  more  than  half  of  his 
time  for  worldly  pursuits,  he  may  be  included  more  towards  the 
world.  Mind  feels  difficulty  in  passing  half  the  time  in  divine 
service.  Little  time  is  allotted  to  divine  services.  If  anyone  wishes 


250  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION   •  Vol-I 

to  enter  paradise  without  rendering  any  account,  let  him  spend 
his  whole  time  in  religious  actions.  If  any  man  wishes  to  make  his 
scale  heavy  with  good  deeds,  let  him  spend  most  part  of  his  time 
in  doing  good  deeds.  God  says:  You  have  got  great  occupations 
in  day  time.  So  remember  your  Lord  at  night  and  be  engaged 
with  undivided  mind  towards  Him.  God  says:  Remember  your 
Lord  morning  and  evening  and  make  prostration  to  Him  in  a 
poTtion  of  the  night  and  glorify  Him  long  at  night.  God  says: 
Glorify  your  Lord  before  sun-rise  and  before  sun-set  and  glorify 
Him  after  prostration  at  night .  God  says:  Praise  your  Lord  when 
you  stand  up  and  read  hisTasbih  at  the  setting  of  the  star  at  night. 
God  says:  Waking  at  night  is  the  firmest  foot  step  and  fruitful  in 
invocation.  God  says:  Glorify  Him  in  some  portions  of  night  and 
some  portions  of  day,  so  that  you  may  find  consolation.  God 
says:  Establish  prayer  at  two  ends  of  the  day  and  a  portion  of 
night.  Surely  good  deeds  remove  evils. 

God  says:  Or  that  man  who  expresses  obedience  by 
prostrating  during  the  whole  night  and  saying  prayer  who  fears 
the  next  world  and  hopes  for  the  mercy  of  his  Lord.  Say:  Are 
those  who  are  wise  equal  to  the  ignorant?  God  says:  Their  sides 
turn  over  their  beds  and  they  call  their  Lord  in  hope  and  fear. 
God  says:  They  sleep  very  little  at  night  and  seek  forgiveness  at 
the  latter  part  of  night.  God  says:  Don't  drive  away  those  who 
call  their  Lord  for  His  pleasure  at  dawn  and  at  dusk. 

The  above  verses  make  it  clear  to  you  that  the  easy  way  of 
getting  God  is  to  engage  yourself  in  thoughts  of  God  and  to  do  all 
actio'ns  regularly  after  division  of  time.  For  this  reason,  the 
Prophet  said:  Those  who  look  at  the  sun,  moon  and  shade  to 
remember  God  are  dear  to  God.  God  says:  The  sun  and  the  moon 
go  on  according  to  a  measure.  God  says:  Have  you  not  looked 
towards  your  Lord  how  He  extends  the  shade?  If  He  wished.  He 
would  have  made  it  stationary  and  made  the  sun  proof  therein. 
Then  I  draw  it  easily  towards  Myself.  God  says:  It  is  He  who 
made  the  stars  for  you,  that  they  may  show  paths  in  the  darkness 
of  seas  and  lands.  So  think  that  movements  are  not  only  for  the 
worldly  actions  but  also  to  ascertain  the  measure  of  time  by  their 
help  and  to  do  business  of  the  next  world  by  dividing  time.  The 
following  verse  is  its  proof:  He  created  the  day  and  night 
alternately  for  one  who  wishes  to  remember  Him  or  wishes  to 
express  gratefulness.  This  means  that  what  the  day  makes 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  251 

towards  loss  is  compensated  by  the  night.  There  is  no  other  thing 
between  Zikr  and  gratefulness.  God  says:  I  have  created  day  and 
night  as  two  signs.  I  make  the  sign  of  day  clear  by  removing  the 
sign  of  night,  so  that  the  people  may  see  clearly,  so  that  you  may 
seek  grace  from  your  Lord  and  may  count  year. 

NUMBER  OF  DIVISIONS  OF  TIME 

There  are  seven  divisions  of  day-(l)  one  division  from  early 
morning  up  to  sun-rise,  (2)  two  divisions  from  sun-rise  to  mid 
day,  (3)  two  divisions  from  the  declining  of  the  sun  to  afternoon, 
(4)  two  divisions  from  afternoon  to  sunset.  Night  has  got  five 
divisions  two  divisions  from  sun-set  up  to  going  to  bed  and  three 
divisions  from  mid-night  to  dawn.  Now  I  shall  narrate  the  divine 
service  during  these  divisions  of  day  and  night. 

FIRST  DIVISION:  This  covers  the  period  from  the  morning 
twi-light  up  to  sun-rise.  This  is  the  honoured  time  as  God  says:  By 
oath  of  early  dawn  when  it  gives  out  breath.  Praising  this  time, 
God  says:  Say,  I  take  refuge  to  the  Lord  of  eariy  dawn.  His  power 
has  been  manifested  by  suppression  of  shade  at  this  time  as  God 
says:  Then  I  take  it  to  Me  easily.  There  is  hint  of  reciting  Tasbih  at 
this  time  in  this  verse:  When  there  is  dusk  and  when  there  is 
dawn,  proclaim  the  glory  and  purity  of  God.  God  says:  Glorify 
your  Lord  with  His  praise  before  sun-rise  and  before  sun  set.  God 
says:  Remember  the  name  of  your  Lord  morning  and  evening. 

RULES  OF  THIS  TIME:  After  getting  up  from  bed, 
remember  God  by  saying:  All  praise  is  due  to  God  who  gave  me 
life  after  He  made  me  dead  and  to  Him  is  the  return.  Then  make 
ablution  with  cleansing  teeth  and  pray  two  rak'ats  of  prayer  in 
your  house  and  then  go  to  the  mosque  and  pray  two  rak'ats  of 
compulsory  prayer.  You  should  not  miss  morning  and  night 
prayers  in  congregation  as  there  are  good  rewards  therefore.  The 
Prophet  said  with  regard  to  the  morning  prayer:  If  a  man  goes  to 
the  mosque  for  prayer  after  ablution,  one  reward  is  written  for 
each  step  he  takes  and  one  sin  is  forgiven.  This  reward  is 
increased  to  ten  fold.  When  he  finishes  the  prayer  at  the  time  of 
sun-rise,  one  reward  is  written  for  his  every  hair  of  his  body-and 
the  reward  of  one  accepted  Haj  is  given  to  him.  If  he  sits  waiting 
for  the  forenoon  prayer,  one  lac  rewards  are  written  for  him  for 
each  rak'at.  At  the  end  of  prayer,  keep  seated  till  sun-rise  with 
Zikr  of  God.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  keeps  seated  till  sun-rise 


252  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  Vol-I 

after  morning  prayer  and  remains  busy  in  Zikr,  it  is  dear  to  me 
than  the  manumission  of  four  slaves.  Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said 
that  the  Prophet  had  said:  God  said:  O  children  of  Adam,  make 
My  Zikr  for  one  hour  after  morning  prayer  and  for  one  hour  after 
afternoon  prayer.  What  is  acquired  in  between  these  hours  will 
be  sufficient  for  you.  There  are  four  kinds  of  recitations  upto  sun 
rise-(l)  Doa  and  Zikr,  (2)  Tasbih,  (3)  Quran  reading  and  (4)  to 
ponder  over  the  creations  of  God. 

(1)  DOA  AND  ZIKR:  When  you  finish  your  prayer,  make 
Monazat  by  saying:  O  God,  send  blessings  on  Muhammad  and  the 
family  of  Muhammad  and  also  Salam.  O  God,  Thou  art  peace,  from 
Thee  peace  and  to  Thee  peace  returns.  O  our  Lord,  make  us  live  with 
peace  and  admit  us  in  the  abode  of  peace.  Thou  art  blessed,  O 
possessor  of  dignity  and  honour.  Then  recite  the  following  which 
the  Prophet  used  to  recite:  Glory  be  to  My  Lord,  the  Highest,  the 
Bestower  of  gifts.  There  is  no  deity  but  God,  the  single,  He  has  got 
no  partner.  Kingdom  is  His  and  all  praise  is  His.  He  gives  life  and 
takes  it..  He  is  ever-living,  He  has  no  death,  all  good  is  in  His  hands 
and  He  is  powerful  over  everything. 

(2)  TASBIH:  It  is  a  collection  of  some  formulas  and  each 
formula  should  be  repeated  from  three  times  to  one  hundred 
times.  The  more  you  recite  them,  the  more  efficacious  they  are. 
These  formulas  are  generally  ten.  (a)  There  is  no  deity  but  God, 
etc.  as  mentioned  above,  (b)  Glory  be  to  God  and  all  praise  is  due 
to  God.  There  is  no  deity  but  God.  God  is  greatest.  There  is  no 
might  and  strength  except  in  God,  the  Great,  the  Mighty,  (c)  He  is 
glorious,  pure,  O  our  Lord  and  the  Lord  of  angels  and  Ruh.  (d) 
Glory  be  to  God,  the  great  and  all  praise  is  His.  (e)  I  seek 
forgiveness  to  God,  the  Great,  there  is  no  deity  but  He,  the  Ever 
living,  the  Ever  subsisting,  I  seek  return  to  Him.  (f)  O  God,  there 
is  none  to  reject  what  Thou  bestoweth  and  non  to  give  what  Thou 
doth  reject  and  no  man  of  honour  can  give  benefit  and  benefit 
comes  form  Thee  alone,  (g)  There  is  no  deity  but  God,  the 
Sovereign,  the  open  Truth,  (h)  I  begin  in  the  name  of  God. 
Nothing  in  the  world  and  heaven  can  do  harm  if  His  name  is 
remembered  and  He  is  Hearing,  Knowing,  (i)  O  God,  send 
blessing*  on  Muhammad,  Thy  servant  and  Prophet  and  Apostle, 
the  illiterate  Prophet,  (i)  I  seek  refuge  to  God,  the  Hearing,  the 
Knowing  from  the  accursed  devil.  O  Lord,  I  seek  refuge  from  the 
machinations  of  the  devil. 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  253 

(3)  QURAN  READING:  If  you  wish  to  get  the  rewards  of 
Zikr,  Doa  and  Quran  reading  together,  read  before  the  sun  rise 
and  sun  set  the  Doa  which  Khizr  taught  Ibrahim  Taimi  called 
"MusabbhatuI  Arsh"  which  is  as  follows. 

(1 )  Read  each  seven  times-Fateha,  Nas,  Falaq,  Ikhlas,  Kaferun 
and  Ayatul  Qursi,  and  then  (2)  recite  seven  times  'Glory  be  to 
God,  all  praise  is  His,  there  is  no  deity  but  God  and  God  is 
greatest'  (3)  Then  send  blessings  on  the  Prophet  seven  times  and 
(4)  then  seek  forgiveness  seven  times  for  yourself,  for  your 
parents  and  for  the  male  and  female  believers  and  (5)  then  utter 
seven  times  the  Doa  as  prescribed.  Don't  give  it  up  any  time 
before  sun  rise  and  sun  set. 

Ibrahim  Taimi  saw  in  dream  the  Prophet  and  asked  him 
about  the  Doa  that  Khizr  had  dictated  to  him  and  the  Prophet 
said:  It  is  true.  Khizr  has  spoken  the  truth.  What  Khizr  says  is 
true.  He  knows  the  dwellers  of  the  world  and  he  is  the  best  of 
Abdals.  He  is  one  of  the  soldiers  of  God  in  the  world.  If  a  man 
recites  it,  among  other  rewards,  God  will  forgive  him  and  will 
lift  His  anger  from  him  and  order  the  angel  in  his  left  side  not  to 
write  his  sins  for  one  year.  None  observes  it  except  one  who  has 
been  made  fortunate  by  God  and  none  forsakes  it  except  one  who 
has  been  made  unfortunate  by  Him. 

(4)  GOOD  THOUGHTS,  (a)  Think  of  your  past  sins  and  try 
to  remove  them.  Remove  the  obstacles  to  good  deeds  and  think 
of  doing  good  for  yourself  and  general  Muslims,  (b)  Think  of 
profitable  things  in  the  spiritual  world  and  that  of  the  gifts  of 
God,  open  and  secret.  Think  of  the  God's  rewards  and 
punishments.  This  pondering  is  the  best  divine  service  as  it 
contains  the  remembrance  of  God  and  two  sincere  things.  (1)  The 
first  thing  is'  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  about  God  as 
contemplation  is  the  key  to  the  earning  of  spiritual  light.  (2)  The 
second  thing  is  the  increase  of  God's  love,  as  love  does  not  grow 
unless  there  is  firm  honour  for  Him  in  heart.  Glory  of  God  is  not 
opened  to  the  mind  unless  one  is  acquainted  with  God's 
attributes  and  His  wonderful  creations.  The  fruit  of  meditation  is 
acquaintance  or  Ma'arfat.  Honour  grows  from  acquaintance  and 
love  grows  from  honour  and  deep  attachment  grows  from  love. 
There  is  difference  between  Abed  and  Aref.  The  former  is  like 
one  who  hears  about  a  thing  and  the  latter  is  like  one  who  sees 
that  thing  with  his  eyes.  Aref  sees  God's  glory  with  the  inner  light 


254  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  Vol-I 

of  his  mind  and  Abed  sees  it  with  the  outer  light  of  his  eyes. 
There  is  no  limit  to  the  inner  light  of  mind,  but  there  is  limit  to  the 
external  eye  sight.  The  Prophet  said:  God  has  got  seventy 
screens.  If  He  had  disclosed  them,  the  brilliance  of  God's  face 
would  have  destroyed  what  one  could  have  seen.  These  screens 
are  one  above  another  and  the  brilliance  of  their  lights  has  got 
degrees  just  like  the  difference  of  the  lights  of  the  stars,  moon  and 
sun. 

(2)  The  Second  division  of  day  begins  from  sun-rise  to  a  little 
before  mid-day.  There  are  two  duties  therein.  One  duty  is  to 
observe  Ishraq  and  Zoha  prayers  ad  another  duty  is  to  do  all 
actions  in  connection  with  the  people  and  for  their  good.  It  is 
better  to  pray  Ishraq  of  two  rak'ats  just  after  sun-rise  and  4, 6,  or  8 
rak'ats  Zoha  prayer  when  the  sun-rises  very  high  and  before 
noon.  God  says:  Oath  of  Zoha  and  darkness  of  night.  Regarding 

.  the  second  duty,  it  is  to  visit  patients,  to  join  funeral  prayer,  to  do 
good  works,  to  be  present  in  the  assemblies  of  the  learned  and  to 
do  good  to  the  Muslims. 

(3)  The  Third  division  of  day  begins  just  before  noon  and 
declining  of  the  sun.  There  is  order  for  prayer  after  every  three 
hours.  There  is  a  prayer  after  sun-rise.  After  three  hours,  there  is 
the  prayer  of  Zoha  and  next  after  three  hours,  there  is  the  prayer 
of  Zuhr  and  next  after  three  hours,  there  is  Asr  prayer  and  next 
after  three  hours  there  is  Magrib  prayer.  In  the  mean  time,  one 
can  do  worldly  business. 

(3)  The  Fourth  division  of  day  begins  from  the  declining  of 
the  sun  after  noon  and  ends  after  Zuhr  prayer.  Before  Zuhr,  pray 
four  rak'ats  Sunnat  prayer.  Make  it  long  and  this  is  the  time  of 
acceptance  of  invocation.  After  Zuhr  prayer,  pray  two  rak'ats 
Sunnat  and  then  2  or  4  rak'ats  Nafl. 

(5)  The  Fifth  division  of  day  begins  from  the  end  of  Zuhr 
prayer  till  Asr  or  afternoon.  There  is  a  great  reward  for  waiting 
for  the  next  compulsory  prayer  after  finishing  one.  This  was  the 
habit  of  the  former  sages.  A  certain  wise  man  said:  Three  things 
are  not  dear  to  God.  (1 )  to  laugh  without  any  wonderful  thing.  (2) 
to  eat  without  hunger  and  (3)  to  sleep  at  day  without  being 
wakeful  at  night.  To  sleep  for  8  hours  during  24  hours  is 
sufficient.  Thus  one  third  of  life  is  lost  in  sleep. 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  255 

(6)  The  Sixth  division  of  day  begins  from  Asr  prayer. 
Perform  four  rak'ats  of  Sunnat  prayer  before  Azan  and  Aqamat 
and  then  pray  four  rak'ats  of  compulsory  prayer.  It  is  a  most  . 
opportune  time.  There  is  no  prayer  after  Asr. 

(7)  The  Seventh  division  of  day  begins  when  the  sun  is 
covered  with  dust  and  snow  and  is  the  time  immediately  before 
sun-set.  God  says:  When  it  is  dusk  and  dawn,  glorify  Him.  God 
says:  Glorify  Him  at  two  extremes  of  the  day.  God  says:  Seek 
forgiveness  for  your  sins  and  proclaim  the  purity  of  your  Lord 
with  praise  at  dawn  and  at  dusk. 

FIVE  DIVISIONS  OF  NIGHT 

(1)  The  First  division  of  night.  When  the  sun  sets,  pray 
Magrib  and  remain  busy  in  Zikr  between  two  prayers.  The  end  of 
this  division  is  up  to  the  setting  of  red  hue  in  th  western  sky.  God 
has  taken  oath  of  this  time:  Nay,  I  swear  by  the  night  fall.  The 
excellence  of  prayer  at  this  time  is  like  that  of  night  prayer  as  it  is 
the  first  stage  of  night.  God  says:  Glorify  God  in  one  portions  of 
night.  This  is  the  prayer  of  Awabin.  The  object  of  the  following 
verse  is  this:  'Their  sides  roll  in  their  beds".  When  asked  about 
this  verse  the  Prophet  said:  It  is  the  prayer  between  Magrib  and 
Isha  as  it  removes  the  sins  of  useless  talks  of  day  time  and  makes 
its  end  good.  Pray  two  rak'ats  after  Magrib.  Then  pray  four  long 
prayers  and  then  continue  prayer  till  the  setting  of  the  red  hues  in 
the  western  horizon. 

(2)  The  second  divisions  of  night  begins  from  the  early  time 
of  Isha  up  to  the  sleep  of  the  people.  God  says:  I  swear  by  night 
and  what  it  brings  (darkness).  He  said:  Up  to  the  darkness  of  the 
nighf  Pray  four  rak'ats  before  compulsory  prayer  and  two  rakats 
after  it  and  then  four  rak'ats,  after  that  13  rak'ats  and  then  Bitr 
prayer.  This  may  be  done  at  the  earlier  portion  of  night  or  latter 
portion.  The  Prophet  said:  There  is  half  reward  in  saying  prayer 
sitting  than  standing  and  half  reward  in  saying  prayer  lying  than 
sitting. 

(3)  The  third  division  of  night  is  in  sleep.  Sleep  is 
considered  as  Ibadat  if  certain  rules  are  observed.  The  Prophet 
said:  When  a  man  goes  to  bed  after  making  Zikr  with  ablution,  he 
is  rewarded  as  in  a  state  of  prayer  till  he  wakes  up.  An  angel  ■ 
enters  his  dress.  If  he  moves  during  sleep  and  makes  Zikr,  the 


256  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  Vol-I 

angel  invokes  for  him  and  seeks  God's  forgiveness  for  him.  The 
Prophet  said:  When  a  man  sleeps  with  ablution,  his  soul  is  taken 
up  to  the  Throne.  This  happens  in  all  cases.  How  then  is  it 
regarding  special  persons  and  sages?  Secrets  are  disclosed  to 
them  during  sleep.  For  this  Reason,  the  Prophet  said:  The  divine 
services  of  the  learned  and  their  breaths  are  Tasbih.  Hazrat 
Mu'az  said:  I  sleep  and  then  pray  and  what  I  do  in  my  sleep,  I 
think  I  do  it  in  my  wakeful  state.  This  was  mentioned  to  the 
Prophet  who  said:  Mu'az  has  got  good  knowledge  of  religion. 

THERE  ARE  TEN  RULES  OF  SLEEP 

(1)  Teeth  cleansing  and  ablution.  The  Prophet  said:  When  a 
man  sleeps  with  ablution,  his  soul  is  hung  up  with  the  Throne 
and  his  dream  becomes  true  If  he  sleeps  without  ablution,  his 
soul  cannot  reach  there  and  he  cannot  see  dreams  which  are  true. 

(2)  Keep  tooth  stick  and  ablution  water  near  the  head  so  that 
you  may  stand  for  prayer  when  awake.  The  Prophet  used  to 
cleanse  teeth  may  times  at  night  specially  when  he  awoke  from 
sleep.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  goes  to  bed  with  this  intention 
that  he  would  pray  at  night  and  his  two  eyes  prevail  upon  him  nd 
he  sleeps  till  dawn,  whatever  he  intended  is  written  for  him  and 
his  sleep  is  a  gift  from  God  as  it  were. 

(3)  Sleep  at  night  keeping  a  written  wasiat  near  your  head  as 
it  is  no  wonder  to  meet  with  death  during  sleep.  If  a  man  dies 
without  wasiat,  he  will  not  be  Permitted  to  talk  in  grave  till 
Resurrection  Day.  The  dead  persons  will  come  to  meet  him  and 
question  him  but  he  will  not  be  able  to  talk. 

(4)  Sleep  with  sound  mind  after  making  Taubah  for  all  sins 
and  seek  forgiveness  for  all  Muslims.  Don' t  pollute  your  mind  by 
oppressing  any  man  and  don't  be  firm  in  committing  sin  after 
waking.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  goes  to  bed  with  the  intention 
of  doing  no  oppression,  hatred  and  envy,  his  sins  are  forgiven. 

(5)  Don't  sleep  in  soft  bed  and  your  bed  should  be  of  middle 
kind.  There  was  nothing  between  the  bodies  of  Ahle  Suffa  and 
earth.  They  used  to  say:  Our  bodies  have  been  made  of  earth  and 
shall  have  to  return  to  earth. 

(6)  Don't  sleep  till  it  overtakes  you.  The  sleep  of  Ahle  Suffah 
was  strong,  food  little  and  talk  necessary.  For  this  reason,  it  is 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  257 

said  that  they  slept  little  at  night  even  though  it  prevailed  upon' 
them.  The  Prophet  said:  Don't  take  too  much  trouble  at  night.  The  " 
Prophet  was  asked:  A  certain  person  prays  at  night.  When  sleep  ■; 
prevails  over  him,  he  keeps  himself  hanging    with  a  tope.  The- 
Prophet  prohibited  him  from  that.  He  said:  When  it  becomes  easy  to 
you  at  night,  pray.  When  sleep  becomes  strong,  sleep.  The  Prophet 
said:  Strive  hard  in  actions  as  God  does  not  inflict  trouble  over  you  . 
,  until  you  inflict  trouble  on  yourself.  The  Prophet  said:  He  who  does  ■ 
religious  actions  easily  is  best  of  you  The  Prophet  said:  I  pray  and 
sleep,  keep  fast  and  break.  This  is  my  way.  He  who  does  not  follow 
my  ways  in  not  of  me  The  Prophet  said:  Don't  take  too  much  trouble 
for  religion  as  it  is  firm.  He  who  wishes  to  stick  to  it  firmly,  it  will 
overcome  him.  Don't  make  divine  service  a  burden  on  you. 

(7)  Sleep  facing  the  Ka'ba.  It  is  like  keeping  a  dead  body  in  grave 
keeping  the  face  towards  the  Ka'ba. 

(8)  Invoke  at  the  time  of  sleep  and  say:  O  Lord.  I  keep  my  side  in 
Thy  name  and  shall  raise  it  up  in  Thy  name-up  to  the  end.  Recite  special 

'Verses  of  th  e  Quran,  such  as 

Ayatul  Qursi,  the  last  portion  of  Suran  Badr,  Sura  A'raf,  Falaq  and 
Nas  and  25  times  of  the  following  formula  Sobhan  Allah  walhamdo 
lillah  wala  Ilaha  Illallah  and  Allaho  Akbar. 

(9)  Remember  God  at  the  time  of  sleep.  Sleep  is  a  kind  of  death  and 
rising  is  a  kind  of  Resurrection.  God  says:  God  takes  souls  at  the  time  of 
their  death  and  the  souls  of  those  who  do  not  die  in  their  sleep.  God 
says:  He  it  is  who  causes  you  to  die  at  night'  As  a  man  who  is  awake 
sees  things  which  he  does  not  see  in  sleep,  so  also  a  sleeping  man  sees 
things  which  his  mind  cannot  conceive  in  wakeful  state.  Sleep  is  the 
period  between  life  and  death  as  Barzakh  is  the  period  between  this 
world  and  the  next  world.  Loqman  asked  his  son:  O  dear  son,  if  you 
doubt  about  death,  don't  sleep.  As  you  sleep,  so  you  will  die.  If  you 
doubt  about  resurrection,  don't  be  awake.  As  you  wake  up  after  sleep, 
so  you  will  wake  up  after  your  death.  Hazrat  Ayesha  said:  When  the 
Prophet  went  to  bed,  he  used  to  place  his  head  upon  his  right  hand, 
think  himself  dead  and  say:  O  God,  Lord  of  seven  heavens  and  Lord  of 
the  great  Throne.  O  our  Lord  and  the  Lord  of  all  things  and  their  owner. 

(10)  Doa  after  waking  up.  When  the  Prophet  woke  up  form  sleep, 
he  used  to  recite  the  following:  There  is  no.  deity  but  God,  the  Single, 
the  Almighty,  Lord  of  heavens  and  earth  and  what  is  therein,  the 
Mighty,  the  Forgiving".  After  rising,  always  remember  God.  That  is  the 
sign  of  love.  When  you  stand  up  after  rising  from  sleep,  recite:  All 
praise  is  for  God  who  has  given  us  life  after  He  has  made  us  dead  and  to 
Him  is  the  Resurrection. 


258  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  Vol-I 

(4)  Fourth  division  of  night  begins  from  mid  night  and  ends  with 
the  end  of  night  except  one  sixth  of  it  remaining.  At  this  time,  a  man 
rises  to  pray  Tahajjud.  God  says:  I  swear  by  the  night  when  it  is  deep. 
The  Prophet  was  asked:  Which  time  of  the  night  is  the  appropriate  time 
for  exception  of  invocation?  He  said:  Mid-night  Prophet  David  said:  O 
Lord,  I  love  to  do  your  service,  but  what  time  is  most  opportune?  God 
revealed  to  him:  O  David,  don't  be  awake  in  the  early  or  latter  part  of 
the  night  as  he  who  does  not  sleep  in  its  early  part  sleeps  at  its  latter 
part.  IF  one  keeps  awake  at  the  latter  part  of  the  nigh  he  cannot  remain 
awake  at  its  early  part,  Keep  awake  in  its  middle  portion,  keep  alone 
with  Me  at  that  time  and  I  also  will  remain  alone  with  you  and  will  raise 
up  your  necessities  The  Prophet  was  asked:  What  portion  of  night  is 
best?  He  said:  The  middle  of  the  latter  half  of  night.  During  this  time, 
pray  by  two  rak'ats.  The  Prophet  used  to  pray  at  least  13  rak'ats  at  this 
including  Bitr  prayer.  There  are  prescribed  invocations  to  be  recited 
therein. 

(5)  Fifth  division  of  night.  The  remaining  portion  of  night  is  Sehri 
time.  God  says:  Seek  forgiveness  at  Sehri  time.  This  is  the  time  of 
departure  of  angels  of  night  and  the  arrival  of  the  angels  of  day.  When 
there  is  dawn,  there  is  the  end  of  this  division  and  the  beginning  of  the 
divisions  of  the  day.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  fasts,  gives  charity, 
visits  the  sick  and  attends  funeral  service  every  day,  his  sins  are 
forgiven.  In  another  narration,  he  enters  Paradise.  The  companions  did 
not  miss  a  day  without  charity  even  though  it  be  with  a  date  or  a  piece 
of  bread:  as  the  Prophet  said:  A  man  remains  under  the  shadow  of  his 
charity  till  he  faces  judgment.  The  Prophet  said:  Save  yourself  from  Hell 
by  giving  in  charity  even  a  portion  of  date.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man 
rises  at  dawn,  there  is  the  duty  of  charity  upon  every  vein  of  his  body. 
He  has  got  360  veins.  Your  enjoining  good  is  an  act  of  charity,  your 
forbidding  evil  is  an  act  of  charity,  your  helping  a  weak  man  in  bearing 
his  load  is  an  act  of  charity,  your  showing  path  to  man  is  an  act  of 
charity,  your  removing  nuisance  from  the  pathway  is  an  act  of  charity. 
Even  he  named  Tasbih  and  Tahlil  as  acts  of  charity.  Then  he  said:  Two 
rak'ats  of  prayer  before  noon  take  away  all  rewards. 

DIVISIONS  OF  TIME  ACCORDING 
TO  CIRCUMSTANCES 

(1)  A  WORSHIPER  is  one  who  has  got  no  business  except  divine 
service.  If  he  gives  up  divine  service,  he  sits  without  occupation.  Some 
of  the  companions  used  to  recite  Tasbih  1200  times  daily,  some 
30,000times,  some  prayed  from  300  to  600  rka'ts.  Others  prayed  at  least 
100  rak'ats  a  day  and  a  night.  Some  finished  the  Quran  once  a  day,  some 
twice  a  day.  Karrah-b-  Bashrah  used  to  make  Tawaf  of  the  Ka'ba  70 
times  at  day  time  and  70  times  at  night.  Inspite  of  that,  they  finished  the 
Quran  twice  every  day  and  night.  The  saint  Ibrahim-b-Adham  said  as 
reported  from  an  angel  that  he  who  recites  the  following  will  not  die  till 
he  sees  his  place  in  Paradise:  Glory  be  to  the  Highest  Judge.  Glory  be  to 
the  strict  Law-giver.  Glory  be  to  One  who  effaces  the  night  and  brings 
the  day.  glory  be  to  One  whom  no  affair  can  keep  busy.  Glory  be  to  God, 
the  Merciful,  the  Begining. 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  259 

(2)  A  LEARNED  MAN  is  he  whose  learning  benefits  the  people, 
such  as  giving  legal  decisions,  teaching,  writing  religions  books.  His 
division  of  time  is  not  like  those  of  an  Abed  or  worshiper,  as  his 
reading  and  writing  books  are  necessary  and  i*  requires  a  great  deal  of 
time.  The  excellence  of  learning  and  teaching  proves  it.  The  learning 
which  we  speak  of  and  which  is  above  divine  service  is  that  learning 
which  creates  a  desire  for  the  Hereafter,  distaste  of  this  world  or  such  a 
learning  which  helps  journey  towards  the  next  world  and  not  that 
learning  which  helps  increase  of  wealth  and  properties.  He  should  be 
busy  up  to  sun-  rise  in  Zikr  and  invocations  and  after  sun-rise  up  to 
noon  in  teaching  and  learning,  and  from  noon  to  Asr  in  reading  and 
writing  books  and  from  Asr  to  sunset  in  Hadis,  Tafsir  and  other 
benefiting  subjects. 

(3)  STUDENTS:  The  Prophet  said:  To  be  present  in  an  assembly  of 
Zikr  is  better  than  prayers  of  one  thousand  rak'ats,  attending  one 
thousand  funerals  and  visiting  one  thousand  patients.  The  Prophet 
said:  When  you  see  a  garden  of  Paradise,  roam  in  it.  He  asked:  O 
Prophet  of  God,  what  is  the  garden  of  Paradise?  He  said:  Assembly  of 
Zikr.  So  a  student  should  not  turn  away  from  such  an  assembly.  When  a 
man  complained  to  Hasan  Basari  above  the  hardness  of  his  heart,  he 
said  to  him:  Attend  the  assembles  of  Zikr. 

(4)  BUSINESS  MAN:  He  who  is  required  to  do  business  for  all 
times  to  maintain  his  family  members,  should  do  it  without  engaging 
himself  in  divine  service  for  all  times  with  this  condition  that  he  must 
remember  God  in  all  his  dealings  and  not  forget  Him  and  perform 
compulsory  divine  services. 

(5)  AN  ADMINISTRATOR  is  like  a  leader.  Similar  is  the  case  of  a 
judge,  or  a  mutawalli  or  a  person  on  whom  the  affairs  the  Muslims  have 
oeen  entrusted.  They  should  remember  how  the  rightly  guided  Caliphs 
conducted  themselves  with  heavy  duties  on  their  shoulders. 

(6)  UNITARIAN:  He  is  one  who  is  engaged  in  the  meditation  of 
God,  does  not  love  anybody  except  God  and  does  not  fear  anybody 
except  Him.  He  does  not  accept  provision  except  from  Him.  Such  a  man 
need  not  observe  the  divisions  of  time  but  should  keep  company  with, 
God  soon  after  the  compulsory  prayers  with  humility  of  mind.  In  other 
words  there  is  lesson  for  him  in  whatever  thoughts  occur  in  his  mind, 
whatever  sound  falls  in  his  ears  and  whatever  things  fall  in  his  eyes. 
Such  a  man  flees  towards  God  as  God  says:  So  flee  away  to  God.  The 
support  of  the  above  version  is  found  also  in  the  following  verse:  when 
you  put  them  alone  and  they  do  not  worship  except  God,  they  take 
shelter  to  a  cave  and  your  Lord  will  provide  them  with  space  out  of  His 
mercy.  There  is  another  verses:  I  am  going  towards  my  Lord  and  He 
will  soon  guide  me'.  This  is  the  rank  of  a  Siddiq. 

SECTION  2 

EXCELLENCE  OF  NIGHT  WORSHIP 

The  Prophet  said:  Sun-set  prayer  is  best  to  God.  It  has  not  been 
reduced  for  a  traveller.  It  opens  night  prayers  and  ends  day  prayers.  If  a 


260  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  Vol-I 

man  prays  two  rak'ats  Magrib  prayers,  two  buildings  will  be  built  for 
him  in  Paradise.  The  distance  of  the  two  buildings  is  the  path  of  one 
hundred  years.  In  between  them,  there  are  trees  which  are  suf  ficien  t  for 
the  inmates  of  the  world  to  see  after  roaming.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man 
says  ten  rak'ats  of  prayer  between  Magrigb  and  Isha,  there  will  be 
building  for  him  in  Paradise.  Hazrat  Omar  asked:  O  Prophet  of  God, 
our  buildings  then  would  be  numerous.  He  said:  God  has  got  much 
more  and  better.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  prays  Magrib  in 
congregation  and  two  rak'ats  in  addition  without  talking  any  worldly 
things  in  between  them  and  reads  chapter  Faitha  and  then  verses  from 
the  first  portion  of  chapter  Baqr  and  two  verses  from  its  middle,  chapter 
Ikhlas  15  times  and  then  makes  Ruku  and  prostration  and  when  he 
stands  for  the  second  rak'at  and  recites  chapter  Fatiha,  Ayatul  Kursi 
and  three  verse  of  chapter  Baqr,  and  chapter  Ikhlas.  15  times,  his 
rewards  will  be  unlimited  according  to  a  tradition. 

Once  Obaidullah  was  asked:  Did  the  Prophet  pray  except  the 
compulsory  prayers?  He  replied:  He  prayed  between  Magrib  and  Isha, 
that  is  the  prayer  of  Awabin.  Hazrat  Anas  and  Ibn  Masud  used  to  pray 
them  always.  The  sage  Abu  Sloaiman  Darani  said  that  to  pray  this 
Awabin  prayer  is  better  than  optional  fast. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  NIGHT  PRAYER 

QURAN:  God  says:  Your  Lord  knows  that  you  stand  up  in  prayer 
for  two  thirds  of  the  night.  God  says:  Divine  service  at  night  is  the  firm 
footstep  and  fruitful  for  invocations.  God  says:  He  who  says  prayer 
standing  and  with  prostration  throughout  the  night  and  fears  the  next 
world,  etc.  God  says:  Those  who  pass  the  night  for  their  Lord  prostraing 
and  standing  in  prayer,  etc.  God  says:  Seek  help  with  patience  and 
prayer.  . 

HADIS:  Thee  Prophet  said:  When  one  of  you  sleeps,  the  devil ' 
knots  three  ties  by  his  side  and  says  to  each  tie:  You  have  got  a  greater 
'  portion  of  night  and  so  sleep.  If  he  awakes  and  makes  Zikr  of  God,  one 
-tie  is  unloosened.  If  he  prays,  anothef*tie  is  unloosened.  Then  he  rises 
up  with  pleasure  or  with  displeasure.  Mention  was  once  made  to  the 
Prophet  of  a  man  who  sleeps  all  the  night  and  he  said:  The  devil  has 
passed  urine  in  his  ears.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  prays  two  rak'ats  in 
mid  night,  it  is  better  for  him  than  the  world  and  what  it  contains.  Had  it 
not  beeh  difficult  for  my  followers,  I  would  have  made  it  compulsory 
for  them.  The  Prophet  said:  There  is  a  time  at  night  which  nobody 
shbuld  miss.  If  he  prays  at  that  time,  God  accepts  it.  This  happens  in  all 
nights.  Mugirah-b-Shubah  narrated  that  the  Prophet  used  to  stand  so 
long  in  prayer  that  his  feet  became  swollen.  He  was  asked:  What  is  it? 
•God  has  forgiven  all  your  past  and  future  sins.  He  said:  Shall  I  not  be  a 
grateful  servant? 

This  shows  that  the  additional  worship  is  for  additional  rank  as 
gratefulness  brings  additional  rewards.  God  says:  If  you  are  grateful,  I 
will  given  you  additional  rewards.  The  Prophet  said:  O  Abu  Hurairah, 
ifyou  wish  to  get  the  mercy  of  God  while  you  are  alive  and  while  you 
-are  dead  in  grave,  get  up  at  night  and  pray  and'seek  the  pleasure  of  God. , 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  261 

O  Abu  Hurairah,  pray  in  a  corner  of  your  house.  As  the  dwellers  of  the 
earth  see  the  brightness  of  the  stars,  so  the  inmates  of  heaven  see  the 
light  of  your  house.  The  Prophet  said:  You  should  pray  at  night  as  it  was 
the  habit  of  your  earlier  sages.  Prayer  at  night  brings  one  near  God,  his 
sins  are  forgiven,  diseases  of  body  are  cured  and  faults  are  prevented. 
The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  prays  at  night  though  being  prevailed  upon 
by  sleep,  the  rewards  of  prayers  are  also  written  for  him.  Sleep  is  an  act 
of  charity  for  him.  The  Prophet  said  to  Abu  Zarr:  Don't  you  take 
luggage  for  your  journey?  He  said:  Yes  He  said:  Why  don't  you  take 
properties  for  the  Resurrection  Day?  O  Abu  Zarr,  shall  I  not  inform  you 
what  will  benefit  you?  He  said:  Yes,  my  parents  be  sacrificed  to  thee.  He 
said:  Fast  in  summer  for  resurrection  and  pray  two  rak'ats  in  the 
darkness  of  night  for  loneliness  in  grave,  make  pilgrimage  for  great 
works  and  gi  ve  charity  to  thee  poor. 

It  has  been  narrated  that  there  was  a  man  at  the  time  of  the  Prophet 
who  used  to  stand  in  prayer  when  the  people  remained  asleep  and  recite 
theQuran  and  say:  OLord  of  Hell,  save  me  from  it.  Whenit  was  mentioned 
to  the  Prophet,  he  said:  Call  me  when  he  prays.  He  came  and  heard  him 
saying  that.  When  it  was  dawn,  he  said  to  him:  O  man  '  vhy  don't  you  pray 
for  Paradise?  He  said:  O  Prophet  of  God,  I  can't  read  i  tnere  as  my  actions 
havenotreached  thatstaga  Then  Gebriel  camedown  and  said:  Inform  him 
that  God  has  saved  him  from  Hell  and  admitted  him  in  Paradise.  Gebriel 
said  to  the  Prophet  How  good  Ibn  Omar  would  have  been  if  he  would 
have  prayed  at  night?  The  Prophet  informed  him  of  it.  Afterwards  he  used 
to  pray  at  night  Hazrat  Joynal  Abedin  said:  Once  Hazrat  Ihya  ate  bread  of 
wheat  to  his  satisfaction  and  slept  up  to  morning.  God  then  revealed  to 
him:  O  Ihya,  you  have  considered  your  house  better  than  My  house,  your 
neighbour  better  than  My  neighbours.  O  Ihya,  by  My  glory  and  honour,  if 
you  peep  at  the  garden  of  paradise,  your  fat  will  be  swollen  to  get  it  and 
your  soul  will  proceed  forward.  If  you  look  once  to  Hell,  your  fat  will  melt 
and  you  will  shed  blood  after  tears  and  you  will  get  new  skin  after  your  old 
skin  has  melted. 

The  Prophet  was  asked:  a  certain  man  prays  at  night  but  commits 
theft  at  dawn.  He  said:  He  will  not  do  what  he  does.  Tne  Prophet  said; 
May  God  show  mercy  on  him  who  rises  up  at  night  and  prays,  then 
wakes  his  wife  from  sleep  and  she  also  prays.  If  she  refuses,  he  throws 
water  on  her  face.  The  Prophet  said:  May  God  show  mercy  on  the 
woman  who  rises  up  at  night  and  prays  and  then  wakes  up  her 
husband  and  he  also  prays.  If  he  refuses,  she  throws  water  on  his  face. 
The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  rises  up  at  night  and  awakes  his  wife  and 
both  pray  two  rak'ats  of  prayers,  both  we  regarded  as  remerrbering 
ones.  The  Prophet  said:  After  compulsory  prayer,  the  best  puyer  is 
prayer  at  night.  The  Prophet  said:  If  a  man  sleeps  in  his  appointed  time 
or  in  any  portion  of  it  and  makes  divine  service  between  Fajr  and  Zuhr, 
he  worships  as  it  were  the  whole  night. 

Wise  Saying:  Once  Hazrat  Omar  fell  down  afiar  reciting  some 
verses  at  night  and  he  was  looked  after  for  many  days  as  patient  is 
looked  after.  When  the  people  went  to  sleep,  Ibn  Masud  used  to  rise  up 
and  his  voice  used  to  be  heard  up  to  morning  like  the  humming  of  bees. 
Sufiyan  Saori  ate  one  night  witn  satisfaction  and  said:  When  an  ass  is 


262  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  Vol-I 

given  good  grass,'  its  actions  also  become  good.  He  prayed  up  to  dawn. 
Hazrat  Hasan  Basari  said:  I  don't  know  whether  it  is  better  to  spend  this 
property  in  charity  than  to  keep  awake  atnight.  He  was  asked:  Why  do 
the  Faces  of  those  who  pray  Tahajjud  become  brighter  than  those  of 
others?  He  said:  Because  they  stay  with  the  Merciful  in  loneliness  and 
get  light  from  His  light. 

Hazrat  Fuzail  said:  If  you  cannot  keep  awake  at  night  and  keep  fast 
at  day  time,  know  that  you  have  been  deprived  of  good  and  that  your 
sins  have  become  great.  Rubi  said:  I  spent  many  nights  in  the  house  of 
Imam  Shafeyi.  He  used  to  sleep  very  little  at  night.  Abu  Zuairiya  said:  I 
stayed  once  at  the  house  of  Abu  Hunifa  for  six  months.  He  never  kept 
his  side  on  his  bed  for  one  single  night.  At  first  he  used  to  keep  awoke 
for  half  the  night.  While  passing  once  by  a  people,  he  heard  them  say: 
This  man  keeps  awake  the  whole  night.  He  said.  I  don't  do  it. 
After-wards  he  used  to  keep  awake  the  whole  night.  The  sage 
Malek-b-Dinar  said:  One  night  I  forgot  my  duty  and  began  to  sleep.  I 
found  in  dream  a  beautiful  young  girl  with  a  letter  in  her  hand  saying  to 
me:  Can  you  read  this  letter?  I  said  Yes.  She  handed  over  to  me  the  letter 
which  contained:- 

What!  joy  and  hope  have  destroyed  you! 
Has  youf  mind  forgot  the  hope  of  Hurs? 
You  will  stay  in  paradise  withoutdeath. 
You  will  make  enjoyment  then  with  Hurs. 
So  rise  up  from  sleep,  i  t  is  best  for  you. 
Reciting  Quran  in  Tahajjud  is  better  than  sleep. 

Mosruq  once  started  on  pilgrimage  and  spent  the  whole  night  in 
prostration.  It  is  narrated  that  Wahab-b-Munabbah  did  not  place  his 
side  on  bed  for  thirty  years.  Solaiman  Taimi  prayed  Fajar  for  40  yeaTS 
with  theablution  of  Isha. 

CAUSES  OF  MAKING  NIGHT-WAKING  EASY 

Know,  O  dear  read  ers,  that  night  waking  is  difficult  for  many  persons 
but  it  is  easy  for  one  who  has  got  by  God's  mercy  the  secret  and  open 
conditions  of  night- waking.  The  open  conditions  are  four-(I)  Not  to  eat  and 
drink  much  It  begets  sleep  and  there  is  trouble  in  prayers.  A  certain  Sufi 
used  to  advise  his  disciples:  O  congregation  of  disciples,  don't  eat  much, 
don't  drink  much.  If  you  do  it,  it  will  increase  your  sleep  and  you  will 
repent  much  at  the  time  of  your  death.  To  reduce  stomach  from  the  burden 
of  food  is  good.  (2)  Not  to  make  too  much  labour  at  day  time,  as  too  much 
labour  brings  too  much  sleep.  (3)  Not  to  give  up  a  little  sleep  at  day  time  as 
it  is  sunnat  for  night  waking  (4)  Not  to  commit  sins  at  day,  as  it  makes  the 
heart  hard  and  creates  barrier  to  get  mercy  of  God.  Sufi  van  Saori  said:  On 
account  of  one  sin,  I  have  been  deprived  of  prayer  at  night  for  five  months. 
He  was  questioned:  What  is  that  sin?  He  said:  I  said  in  my  mind  on  seeinga 
man  weeping:  Thisheisdoing  for  show  of  people. 

SECRET  CONDITIONS  OF  NIGHT  WAKING 

(1)  To  keep  the  mind  safe  from  hatred  of  the  Muslims,  from 
innovations  and  the  sorrowful  thoughts  of  the  world.  If  a  man  is 


Vol-I  THE  BOOK  OF  WORSHIP  263 

engaged  in  worldly  pursuits,  it  does  not  become  easy  for  him  to  pray  at 
night.  If  he  stands  in  prayer,  thoughts  of  his  worldly  actions  come  in  his 
mind. 

(2)  to  keep  fear  of  God  strong  in  mind  and  to  lessen  hope  When  a 
man  thinks  of  Hell  and  of  the  next  world,  his  sleep  goes  away  and  fear 
comes  in  his  mind. 

(3)  To  know  the  excellence  of  night  prayer  and  to  hope  for  that. 

(4)  Love  for  God  and  strength  of  faith  greatly  entourage  night- 
wakefulness,  as  night  prayer  is  nothing  but  to  hold  secret  talk  with  God. 
He  knows  the  condition  of  mind  and  sees  whatever  faults  the  mind  has 

f;ot.  Forviveness  is  to  be  sought  for  these  faults  to  God.  When  there  is 
ove  for  God,  you  will  love  loneliness  without  doubt  and  taste  in 
monazat.  This  taste  will  give  you  encouragement  to  wake  up  at  night. 
This  taste  should  not  be  removed  as  wisdom  and  wise  sayings  testify  it. 
The  sage  Fuzail-  b-yeaz  said:  When  the  sun  sets  in,  I  become  glad  in 
darkn  ess  as  I  can  stay  then  with  my  Lord  in  loneliness.  When  it  rises  up, 
I  become  sorry  at  the  advent  of  men  to  me.  A  certain  learned  man  said: 
"The  pleasure  which  a  Sufi  gets  in  Monazat  at  night  can  be  compared 
with  that  in  Paradise. 

SIX  STAGES  OF  NIGHT-WAKING 

(1)  To  keep  awake  the  whole  night.  This  is  the  highest  rank 
belonging  only  to  the  strong  who  are  always  engaged  in  divine  service, 
those  who  get  taste  in  monazat  to  Him.,  This  is  the  food  and  life  of  their 
souls.  For  this  reason,  they  feel  easy  to  keep  awake  for  the  whole  night. 
They  sleep  at  day  time  when  the  people  remain  busy  in  worldly  deeds. 
This  was  the  practice  of  some  early  sages  and  saints.  They  used  to  say 
morning  prayer  with  the  ablution  of  Isha  prayer.  Abu  Taleb  makki 
narrated  this  from  4o  narrators.  Among  them,  there  were  Sayyed-b- 
Musayyeb,  Sufyan-b-  Solaim,  Fuzail-b-Yeaz,  Wahab-b-Ward,  Taus, 
Wahab-b-Monabhah,  Rabiy-b-Khasem,  Hakam,  Abu  Solaiman  Darani, 
Ali-b-Bakar,  Abu  Abullah,  Abu  Asem,  Abu  Zaber  Salman, 
Malek-b-Dinar,  Solaiman  Taimi,  Eazid  Rakkashi,  Abu  Hazem, 
Muhammad-b-Munqaderand  others. 

(2)  To  keep  awake  for  half  the  night.  Such  men  were  innumerable. 
Their  habit  was  to  sleep  in  the  first  portion  out  of  three  portions  of  night 
and  the  last  portion  out  of  six  portions  of  night.  Their  time  of  prayer 
was  at  mid-night  and  that  is  better  for  it. 

(3)  To  keep  awake  for  one  third  of  the  night.  For  this,  they  used  to 
sleep  up  to  mid  night  and  then  in  the  one  sixth  portion  of  the  night. 
They  liked  to  sleep  in  the  latter  part  of  the  night  as  the  slumber  of 
morning  is  removed  by  that.  Hazrat  Ayesha  said:  I  did  not  see  the 
Prophet  but  in  sleep  after  Sehri  time. 

(4)  To  keep  awake  in  one  sixth  portion  of  the  night.  It  is  the  middle 
of  the  later  part  of  the  night  and  before  one  sixth  portion  of  the  night. 

(5)  Not  to  observe  any  time  of  night  for  prayer.  Such  a  man  keeps 
awake  at  the  first  part  of  the  night  till  sleep  prevails  over  him.  When  he 
wakes  up,  he  prays.  When  he  again  feels  the  urge  of  sleep,  he  goes  to 


264  ZIKR  AND  INVOCATION  Vol-I 

r 

bed.  Thus  he  gets  up  twice  and  sleeps  twice  during  the  same  night.  This 
is  difficult  bui  better.  This  was  the  habit  of  the  Prophet,  some  great 
companions  and  Tabeyins.  The  Prophet  sometimes  kept  awake  for  one 
third  of  the  night,  sometimes  two  thirds  and  sometimes  one  sixth.  God 
says:  your  Lord  knows  that  you  stand  in  prayer  nearly  two  thirds  of  the 
nigh  t  or  half  or  one  third.  Hazrat  Ayessha  said:  The  Prophet  used  to  get 
up  on  hearing  the  crowing  of  cock.  This  happened  in  the  last  portion  out 
of  the  six  portions  of  the  night. 

(6)  This  is  the  lowest  waking.  To  keep  awake  to  the  measurement 
of  four  or  two  rak'ats  of  prayer  or  to  remain  busy  in  Zikr  and 
invocations  for  one  hour.  For  this  he  gets  the  rewards  of  waking  up  for 
the  whole  night.  The  Prophet  said:  Pray  at  night  even  through  it  is  to 
the  length  of  the  time  of  milking  a  goat. 

EXCELLENCE  OF  SPECIAL  NIGHTS  AND  DAYS 

To  do  divine  service  in  the  nights  which  have  got  excellence  is 
sunnat.  The  number  of  these  nights  is  fifteen.  Nobody  should  neglect 
these  nights  as  these  are  the  reasons  of  good  deeds  and  the  best  time  for 
trade  in  religion.  If  a  man  is  indifferent  at  the  time  of  season,  he  cannot 
make  profit.  These  nights  are  the  following.  Six  odd  nights  of  the  last 
portion  of  Ramzan  including  the  Blessed  night  the  night,  of  17th 
Ramzan  in  which  the  believers  and  the  infidels  met  Badr. 

The  remaining  nine  nights  are  as  follows:  The  first  night  of 
Muharram  the  night  of  Ashura,  thee  first  night  of  Rajab,  the  15th  night 
of  Rajab,  the  27th  night  of  Rajab  as  it  is  the  night  of  Prophet's  ascension 
to  heaven.  The  Prophet  said  about  this  night  of  mercy:  If  a  man  does 
good  deeds  in  this  night,  he  gets  the  rev.  ards  of  one  hundred  years  He 
who  prays  12  rak'ats  in  this  night  reading  in  each  Rak'at  chapter  Fatiha 
and  one  chapter  of  the  Quran  Tashahhaa  once  and  sends  blessings  on 
the  Prophet  one  hundred  times,  invokes  for  himself  what  he  wishes  for 
him  in  this  world  and  the  next  and  gets  up  at  dawn  with  fast,  God 
accept  all  his  invocations.  Then  there  is  the  middle  night  of  Shaban.  One 
is  to  pray  one  hundred  rak'ats  of  prayer  and  recite  Faitha,  ten  times 
Ikhals  in  each  rak'at.  Then  there  are  the  night  of  Arafat  and  the  two 
nights  of  two  I'ds.  The  Prophet  said:  One  who  wakes  up  in  the  nights  of 
two  I'ds,  his  soul  will  not  die  when  all  souls  will  die. 

There  are  nineteen  days  of  excellence:  The  day  of  Araft,  the  day  of 
Ashura,  the  day  of  27th  Rajab  (If  a  man  fasts  on  the  day,  he  keeps  fast  as 
it  were  for  sixty  months  and  God  sends  Gebrief  on  this  day  with  His 
message),  the  17th  day  of  Ramzan  (the  day  on  which  the  battle  of  Badr 
was  fought),  the  15th  day  of  Shaban,  the  Jumma  day,  two  day  of  two 
I'ds,  ten  days  of  Zilhaj  and  the  day  of  Tashriq.  The  Prophet  said:  If  the 
day  of  Jumma  is  safe,  all  the  days  are  safe.  If  the  month  of  Ramzan  is 
safe,  th  e  whol  e  year  is  safe. 


======  THE    END  ====== 