
KlMIYA-I-SA'ADAT 

(Alchemy of Eternal Bliss) 

BY 

IMAM GHAZZALI 



Rendered into English by 
Muhammad Asim Bilal 

Revised by 
Justice Dr. Munir Ahmad Mughal 



KAZI PUBLICATIONS 

Lahore-Pakistan 



ii 



All Rights Rose™* A 

No part of this publication may be reproduced 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form 
or by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying 
recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of 
the Publishers. 



First Edition 2001 

WORLDWIDE COPYRIGHT © 2001 KAZI PUBLICATIONS 

LAHORE - PAKISTAN 



Published by. 

KAZI PUBLICATIONS 

121-Zulqarnain Chambers, 

Ganpat Road, Lahore-Pakistan 

Fax: 92-42-7117606 

E-mail: kazip@brain.net. pk 

URL: http://www.brain.net. pk/ ~ kazip 

Composed by: 
BOUNTY ENTERPRISES 
Imran Park, Outfall Road, 
Near Saggian Bridge, 
Lahore-Pakistan. 

Printed at: 

T'amir-e-Adab Press 
43-Baba Farid Road, 
Lahore Pakistan. 



iii 



PUBLISHER'S NOTE 

Hujjat-ul-lslam Imam Ghazzali (Allah's mercy be 
upon him) has a distinguished place in Islamic history. 
He was first-rate genius who popularized moral 
knowledge among the Muslims. According to some well 
known thinkers and historians of modern world 
Ghazzali's greatest achievement consisted in dethroning 
philosophy from the highest pedestal of knowledge and 
enthroning spiritualism in its place. 

He is like a fountain of Islamic history and will be 
praised till the sun rises. In the course of discussing 
any subject, he himself formulated the questions, those 
could arise in the minds of readers and the very next 
moment he answered the same in the light of Quran 
and Hadith. 

He will be remembered and appreciated in the 
hearts of masses by dint of his work, especially who have 
been persuaded towards the basics of Islam. In son e 
eminent personalities of Islamic period, his name is 
dazzling equally in the East and the West as well. In 
honour of his services for Islam we have no words to 
write, which is enough to say. May Allah Almighty 
accept his efforts and rest his soul in peace in the life 
Hereafter Amin! 

Mr. Muhammad Asim Bilal translated this book 
into English with great care and skill. He has full 
command on both the languages. 

Thanks are due to Justice Dr. Munir Ahmad 
Mughal who devoted his precious time to revise the 
manuscript entirely and correct it wherever necessary 
giving valuable and precious suggestions which have 



IV 



added to the beauty of the translation. May Allah reward 
him with His blessings in the both worlds Amin! 

By the Grace of Allah Almighty, we have published 
more then 200 books on various topics of Islam in 
English including 'The Noble Qur'an' in 9 volmes 
'Sahih al-Bukhari' in 9 volumes, 'Ibn Majah' in 5 
volumes, 'Sunan Nasa'i' in 2 volumes, 'Lu' Lu' wal- 
Marjan' in 3 volumes, 'Mishkat al-Masabih' in 1 volume 
'Riyad as Salihin' in 2 volumes and 'Sirat un Nabf in 6 
volumes, which have been greatly admired by the 
readers within and outside the country. The purpose of 
publishing important Islamic literature into English 
language is to give a reach to the original sources to all 
those who do not understand Arabic by one or the other 
reason. This book is a sequel to this purpose. 

We are also thankful to all the persons who 
participated in the publication of this book at any stage 
whose names can not be entered in this page. 

We have tried our utmost to make the standard of 
printing and getup of the book, the best. On our part we 
endeavour it possible to print this book without mistakes 
even then if any one finds out any mistake, please 
inform us. We will be thankful to him. 

Arabic text of the verses of the Holy Qur'an and 
the text of the Ahadith with their translation into English 
is also given in this book. 

May Allah Grant us His taufiq to act upon his 
commandments and to remain on Sirat-e-Mustaqim. 



The Publishers 



CONTENTS 

Introduction * v 

To Get to Know One's Self 1 

The Marafat of Allah 48 

The 'Marafat' (Cognizance) of the World 77 

Aakhirat: The Hereafter 91 

Islam and it's Essential Elements 141 

The 'Ibadat', i.e., Worship 142 

A. Symposium 144 

B. 'Qudrat' 145 

C. Ilm - 145 

D. Iradah • • 146 

E. Hearing and Sight 146 

F. 'Kalam'-Speech 147 

G. Benefaction (Beneficence) 148 

H. Aakhirat: the Hereafter 149 

I. The Siraat: the Final Passage Way 149 

J. The Prophet I 50 

The Pursuit 0} 'Urn': Education 15 J 

Cleanliness and Purity 160 

Namaz: the Prayers 186 

Namaz: the Prayers I 88 

The Makroohat of 'Namaz': Undesirable 

things in 'Namaz 193 

The 'Rooh' i.e., the Spirit of 'Namaz', the 
Prayers 1^ 



viii 

The 'Tasbeeh', Tahlil', Salat-e-Astaghfar and 

their Benefits 352 

"Tasbeeh-o-Tahmeed" 353 

The Darood Sharif (Salutations, Prayers and 
Blessings in Reverence to the Holy Prophet 

(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 356 

* The 'Astaghfaar' 35g 

The "Adaab" of "Dua" 3 60 

Some Effective (Dua's) Prayers for Mercy 365 

Saying the Rosary: Repertoire Rosarius 374 

Rosaries of the Day 37g 

The Prayers and Worship at Night 392 

Other Affairs of Life: Principals and their 
Decorum 397 

The Decorum and Manners of taking Food 399 

How to take Food 401 

Drinking Water 403 

The 'Adab'- Manners - 'After Finishing Eating' 404 

To Eat in Company , 405 

The Importance of having a Meal with the 
Friends and the Faithful 40 g 

The Etiquette of Entertaining a Friend 409 

'Fazeelate Mezbani' (Blessedness of being the 
Host ) 417 

Invitation to a Repast and Principles of 
Accepting it 4ig 

The Attendance 424 

Seeing off the -Guests 42g 

The 'Nikah ': the Holy Marriage 427 

Virtues of 'Nikah' (the Marriage) 429 



ix 

The 'Aafaat': Hazards of 'Nikah' (Matrimony) 437 

The Wedding Ceremony and its Allied 

Matters 440 

The Qualities to Look for in a Woman before 

Marriage ^2 

Rights and Duties after Nikah 446 

Trade and Vocation for Livelihood 464 

Virtues of Trade and Vocation 465 

The Principles Governing the Earning of 

One's Livelihood according to 'Shariat' 47Q 

Justice and Fairplay in One's Dealings 486 

Being Kind and Considerate in one's Dealings 

with others • 4 ^? 

'Shafqat' Benevolence towards ('Deen') Faith 

in Matters of this World 504 

To Differentiate between the 'Halal' and 'Haram' 514 

The Propriety and Blessings of Seeking 'Halal' ....514 
The Status of Abstinence and Piety in 'Halal- 

o-Haram' * 518 

How to Differentiate between 'Halal-o- 

Haram' ......523 

To Pay Servile respects to a King and take 
Daily Allowance and 'Halal Mai' from him 526 

Amiability and Good Fellowship for Allah 537 

The Meaning of Friendship for Allah 542 

Fighting Against the enemies of Allah 544 

The Code of Conduct in Companionship 547 

Love and Companionship 549 

The Rights of Muslim Brotherhood, 
Associates, Neighbours, Assistants 565 



The Rights of the Parents 589 

' The Rights of the 'Children' ; 591 

The Rights of the Slaves (both Male and 
Female) 594 

Confinement and Solitude 595 

The Harm and Devastation of Solitude 610 

Principles of Retiring into Solitary 
Confinement for Worship of Allah 617 

The Decorum of Going on a Journey ...618 

The 'Niyat' (intention) of undertaking a 

Journey and its Purposeful Details 618 

Zahiri 'Safar': Normal Travel in Life : ..624 

The 'Batini Safar': the Journey for the Good 

of the Hereafter 532 

Other Important Aspects of 'Safar' (Travel: 
Journey).. 634 

'Sama' and' Wajd'... 

Further Details of 'Sama' 656 

'Aadabe Sama' the Decorum of 'Sama' 665 

'Amre Bil Ma'roof and 'Nahi Anil Munkar' : to 

Assert the Right and Oppose the Wrong 668 

The Conditions of 'Ihtisab': Accountability 672 

The Status of 'Ihtisab': Accountability 681 

The 'Muhtasib' 535 

The Prevailing 'Munkarat' (Undesirable 
things) 691 

'Munkarats' of the Mosque 692 

'Munkarat' of the 'Bazaar' (Market Place) 694 

'Munkarats' of the Road Side 695 



xi 

The 'Munkarat' of 'Hammam' (Public Bathing 

Places) • 696 

The 'Munkarats of 'Mehmani' (Entertaining 

to a Meal) 696 

The Ruler, the Subjects and Rule (the 

Government) 698 

The Stages in Man's Life which Impair 
his 'Akhirat' the Blessings of Akhlaqe 

Hassana' (Veritable Conduct) 728 

More about the Excellences of 'Akhlaqe Hassana' 732 

It is Possible to Create Virtuous Traits 737 

The Treatment of the Felons 739 

How to Diagnose the Diseases of the 'Nafs' 748 

Good Conduct: 'Akhlaqe Hassana' 756 

The Bringing up and Nurturing of 'Aulad' 

(One's Children) 761 

The Disciple and 'Riazat' 767 

How to Forestall Sensual Urges; Stomach and it's 

Ravenous Desires 776 

The Verity of Hunger 777 

The Advantages of Remaining Hungry and 

Disadvantages of a Full Stomach 781 

The Manners of a 'Murid' in Eating Less 786 

Virtue of Abstinence from Food: Gluttony and 

its Evils 7 95 

The Hazards of giving up Eating altogether 796 

The Dangers of Sexual Depravity 797 

The Excellence of the Person who Opposes 

Adultery 799 

The Curse of 'Nazre Haram' (ogling) at the 
Women 805 



xii 

The Curse of Talking too much Aimlessly: the 

Dangers of the Tongue §08 

The Blessing of Silence 809 

'Gheebat' (Backbiting) under Extenuating 
Conditions 344 

The 'Kaffara' (the Recompense) of 'Gheebat' 846 

Anger, Spite, Jealousy and their Treatment 858 

'Hassad' - Jealousy and its Dangers 878 

Jealousy and its Harms 884 

Reality of Jealousy 889 

Remedy against Jealousy 891 

Section 896 

The Cure of the Love of World and Explanation 
of the Statement that the Love of the World is 
Real Root of All Sins 597 

The Traditions in Condemnation of the World . ..898 

The Reality of the Evil World 914 

The Remedy for Love of Wealth and Harms of 
Miserliness and Greed and Excellences of 
Generosity 922 

The Abhorance of Wealth 923 

The Benefits and Harms of Wealth ......931 

Harms of Wealth 935 

Disadvantages of Temptation and Greed and 

Advantages of Contentment 939 

Narration ' 942 

Cure of Greed and Temptation 943 

Superiority and Reward of Generosity 948 

Stol V 952 

Stor y 952 



xiii 

Condemnation of Miserliness 954 

Rewards of Giving Preference to others 958 

Who is Generous and who is Miser 963 

The Cure of Miserliness 967 

The Cure of the Poison of Wealth 972 

The Cure of Love of Esteem and the Harms of 

Esteem 981 

The Nature of Esteem 985 

Section 988 

Section 991 

The Cure of Love of Esteem 992 

The Cure of the Love of Peoples Appreciation 

and Abhorance of their Complaint 995 

The Different Levels of People in the Matter of 
Praise and Condemnation 999 



XV 



Bismillaahirrahmaanirraheem 
Nahmaduhu wa nusalli alaa rasulihi kaiecm 

INTRODUCTION 

Countless gratitude equal to the number of stars 
in the sky, drops in the rainfalls, leaves of the trees, 
particles of sand of deserts and the atoms in the heavens 
and the earth is befitting only for Allah, Whose attribute 
is His Oneness and All Majesty, Greatness, Highness and 
Excellence is specific for Him. No servant is aware of the 
perfection of His Majesty. No one has the way in the 
reality of His gnosis. Rather to admit inability to get 
gnosis of reality "is the climax of the most truthful and to 
admit lacking in His praise and hymn is the climax of the 
praise and hymn recited by the angels and the prophets. 
To.become astonished on the first ray of His Majesty is 
the climax of the intellect of the intelligents. To become 
wonder struck in search of the proximity of His Grace is 
the climax of the wayfarers of the mystic way. Its basis is 
the leaving of the hope of gnosis and to leave the desires 
of one's own self. The claim of perfection in the matter 
of His gnosis is to think of similarity and likeness. By 
glancing the grace of His Being, all eyes lot is but 
dazzling. By seeing His strange works the fruit borne by 
all intellects is the necessary gnosis. No one should be 
such who should ponder into the greatness of His Being 
that is how and why He is. No heart should be such that 
may remain inattentive to the strange works of His. What 
those are and with whose power that work. It is so that it 
may recognise that all are definitely the signs of His 



xviii 



O' my dear! You should know that as the 
alchemy of gold is not found in the cottage of every old 
lady rather it is found in the treasures of the highly rich 
persons and the kings. Likewise the alchemy of eternal 
bliss is also not found everywhere. Rather it is found in 
the Divine treasure. The Divine treasure in the heavens 
is the beings of the angels and on the earth the hearts of 
the Prophets. Whosoever will search them anywhere 
except the court of Prophethood he will go astray and 
ultimately will be defrauded. He will b*e getting nothing 
but vain fancy. His poverty will become apparent on the 
Day of Judgment. The whole creation will know his false 
coins and everyone will come to know that he had no 
sense. He will hear the voice:- 

We have removed from the thy veil so thy 
eye is like the steel today. 

The biggest mercy of the Most Merciful of all the 
mercifuls is that He sent one lack twenty four thousand 
Prophets (peace be upon all of them) in the world to 
teach the device of this alchemy and to tell them to put 
the cash coin of heart in the anvil of hardship and to 
teach them the way of reformation of the bad morals 
that cause density and impurity of heart and the way of 
filling the heart with the good morals. As Allah Almighty 
praised Himself by His own Glorification and 
Sovereignty so He declared His attribute of sending of 
the Prophets [and the Messenger (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him)] and referred it as an obligation of 
Him on the creation. Allah Almighty says: 

Glorifies all that is in the heavens and on 
the earth for Allah, the King, the Sacred, 
the Mighty, the Wise. It is He Who sent 
among the unlettered a Messenger (peace 



xix 



and blessings of Allah be upon him) from | 
among themselves who recited to them 
His revelations and purified them and 
taught them the Book and the Wisdom. 
And prior to it they were definitely in 
ignorance manifest. (62 : 1,2) 
The word "yuzakkihim" refers to the same bad 
morals which are the quality of the animals and from 
which the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) gets them released. The words 
Yu'allimuhumul kitaaba wa'l-hikmata refer to it that he 
should make them wear the dress of the attributes of 
angels. And the object of the Alchemy is that a man 
should become pure from all harmful and uncalled for 
things and should be adorned with the attributes of 
perfection. The biggest of all the alchemy is that one 
should turn his face from the world and become 
attentive to Allah Almighty as has been taught to the 
Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him): 

Wazkurisma rabbika wa tabattal ilayhi 
tabteelaa. 

So remember the name of thy Lord and 
devote thyself with a complete devotion. 
(73 : 8) 

Tabteelaa means the disconnection from all 
besides Allah Almighty and to leave oneself completely 
surrendered before Allah Almighty. This is the brief 
description of this alchemy. Its details are lengthy and 
know no bounds. But its title is to know four things, its 
essential elements are to know four dealings, and each 
essential element has got ten basic rules. The four titles 
are: 



XX 



(1) . Knowing one's own self; 

(2) . Knowing the Almighty Allah; 

(3) . Knowing the reality of .the world; and 

(4) . Knowing the reality of the Hereafter. ' 

To know the above four things is in fact the title 
of knowing the Islam of a man. But the affairs of the 
essential elements of Islam are four. 

The two essential elements relate to the outerself 
(zahir) and the two are related to innerself [batin). 

The two essential elements relating to the 
outerself are: 

(1) . To obey the commands of Allah Almighty. These 

are called the acts of worship {'Ibadat). 

(2) . To keep them in view in the matter of one's 

movements and livelihood. These are called the 
dealings (Mu'amalaat). 

The two essential elements relating to the 
innerself {batin) are: 

(1) . To keep the heart purified from all bad morals 

like anger, miserliness, arrogance, pride, self 
appreciation etc. These morals are called 
muhlikaat and 'aqabaat (the dark and narrow 
places where people become victim of robbers) in 
the way of faith. 

(2) . To adorn the heart with good morals like 

patience, gratitude, love, hope, confiding, etc. 
These morals are called munajjiyaat. 

The first essential element in which there is 
mention of 'ibadat consists of ten foundations. They are: 

(i) In the matter of beliefs of Ahl al-Sunnah; 

(ii) In the matter of seeking knowledge; 



xxi 



(iii) In the matter of cleanliness; 
(tv) In the matter of prayer; 

(v) In the matter of Zakat; 

(vi) In the matter of fasting; 

(vii) In the matter of Hajj; 

(viii) In the matter of recitation of the Holy 
Qur'an; 

(ix) In the matter of remembrance, invocations, 
and formulae; and 

(x) In the matter of sequence of formulae. 

The second essential element relating to the 
mutual dealings discipline has also ten foundations, viz.: 

(i) Manners of taking meals; 

(ii) Manners of marriage; 

(iii) Manners of trade and vocations; 

(iv) Manners of seeking the lawful; / 

(v) Manners of companionship; 

(vi) Manners of seclusion; 

(vii) Manners of journey; 

(viii) Manners of poetry and ecstasy; 

(ix) Manners of enjoining good and prohibiting 
evil; and 

(x) Manners for the rulers and the ruled. 

The third essential element relating to ^the 
muhlikaat (destructive elements) has also *ten 
foundations, viz,: 

(i) Manners of self discipline; 

(ii) Manners of cure of over-indulgence in food 
and sex; 

(iii) Manners of cure of talkativeness and the 
evils of the tongue; 



xxii 



(«v) Manners of cure of anger and arrogance 
and false esteem; 

(v) Manners of cure of love of the world; 

(vi) Manners of cure of love for property; 

(vii) Manners of cure of pomp and esteem; 

(viii) Manners of cure of show and hypocrisy; 

(ix) Manners of cure of haughtiness and 
loftiness; and 

(x) Manners of cure of pride and negligence. 
The fourth, essential element relating to 

munajjiyaat (saviours) has also got ten fundamentals 
viz.: ' 

(i) Repentance; 

(ii) Patience and gratitude; 
(Hi) Fear and hope; 

(iv) Poverty and asceticism; 

(v) Intention, sincerity, and truthfulness; 

(vi) Devotion and self-accountability; 

(vii) Contemplation (to ponder upon); 

(viii) Unity of God and trusting in Him; 

(ix) Love of God; and 

(x) Death and its remembrance. 

This is the list of the essential elements and the 
fundamentals of the book Kimya-iSa'adat. We shall 
explain the four titles and forty fundamentals clearly and 
would restrain our pen from indulging in difficult phrases 
and niceties so that this book becomes easily 
understandable. It is so because anyone who wants to 
do research or to go deep into the niceties may consult 
and study.our Arabic books like Ihya al-'Ulum, Jawahir 
al-Qur'an or other compilations on this discipline. The 



XV 



Bismillaahirrahmaanirraheem 
Nahmaduhu wa nusalli "alaa rasulihi karccm 

INTRODUCTION 

Countless gratitude equal to the number of stars 
in the sky, drops in the rainfalls, leaves of the trees, 
particles of sand of deserts and the atoms in the heavens 
and the earth is befitting only for Allah, Whose attribute 
is His Oneness and All Majesty, Greatness, Highness and 
Excellence is specific for Him. No servant is aware of the 
perfection of His Majesty. No one has the way in the 
reality of His gnosis. Rather to admit inability to get 
gnosis of reality is the climax of the most truthful and to 
admit lacking in His praise and hymn is the climax of the 
praise and hymn recited by the angels and the prophets. 
To.become astonished on the first ray of His Majesty is 
the climax of the intellect of the intelligents. To become 
wonder struck in search of the proximity of His Grace is 
the climax of the wayfarers of the mystic way. Its basis is 
the leaving of the hope of gnosis and to leave the desires 
of one's own self. The claim of perfection in the matter 
of His gnosis is to think of similarity and likeness. By 
glancing the grace of His Being, all eyes lot is but 
dazzling. By seeing His strange works the fruit borne by 
all intellects is the necessary gnosis. No one should be 
such who should ponder into the greatness of His Being 
that is how and why He is. No heart should be such that 
may remain inattentive to the strange works of His. What 
those are and with whose power that work. It is so that it 
may recognise that all are definitely the signs of His 



xvi 



Power, and lights of His greatness. The whole wonder is 
working under His policy and the whole reflection is of 
His Grace. 

Whatever is there, it is from Him and due to Him. 
Rather, all that is, it is He. As nothing has in reality 
existence beyond Him. Rather the existence of all is the 
reflection of His Being. 

The countless Salutations, Peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon Hazrat Muhammad, the chosen 
Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him), the chief and leader of all the prophets and 
messengers of Allah and of all the believers, the trustee 
of the Divine secrets, and selected by the Divine court 
and on his friends and on his family members as each 
one of them is also leader of the Ummah and guide to 
the way of Shari'at. 

Thereafter, 0' my dear! Know it fully well that 
Allah Almighty has not created man for sport and vanity. 
Rather his duty and the dangers lying therein are both 
tremendous as if he is not eternal (azali) but certainly he 
is to live for ever (abadi). That is, if he is not from 
always, he will be for always. Thouh his body is 
insignificant being made of clay but the reality of his 
spirit is significant being divine. Though its origin is 
mixed with the qualities of the animals and the beasts 
and devils and their impurities but when it is put to 
hardship it becomes purified and gets the capability of 
becoming near to God. It is his function to be the worst 
of the lowest and to be the best of the highest. Its lowest 
ebb is that by falling into pit of the animal and beast and 
devils it is entangled in the web of anger and desire. Its 
climax is this that it reaches the rank of angels. For 
example, it should get salvation from the clutches of 



xvii 



anger and desire. Both these should be his prisoners and 
he should be their king. When this rank of kingship is 
gained by him, he becomes worthy to worship Allah 
Almighty. This capacity to worship is the attribute of the 
angels. It is the perfection of rank of a human being. 
When he gets the taste of the love of Grace of Allah he 
cannot pass a moment deprived of the Divine Sight. The 
sight of the Unending grace becomes his Paradise. The 
paradise of eye, belly and sex become insignificant and 
worthless for him. As the basis of man is imperfect and 
insignificant in the beginning of his birth hence to make 
him perfect is not possible without hardship, and 
treatment like the alchemy that purifies the brass and 
copper and renders it into gold is extremely difficult. 
Everyone cannot identify it. Likewise this alchemy, that 
purifies the basis of man from the impurities of beastly 
habits and brings to it the angelic purification and nicety 
due to which it gets the eternal bliss. It is very difficult 
and every person does not know it. The object of writing 
this thesis is to state the elements of this alchemy which 
in fact is the alchemy of the eternal bliss. For this reason 
we have named this book as Kimiya-i-Sa'adat (Alchemy 
of the eternal bliss). The name alchemy is much befitting 
this book. The reason is that in the brass and copper 
there is no difference other than yellowness and weight 
and by this alchemy there is no other object but to 
become rich in this world. The worldly life is short . The 
worldly wealth is nothing in itself. There is poles' 
difference between the habits of the cattle and the 
attributes of the angels. The fruit of this alchemy is 
eternal bliss. There is no end to its limit. There is no end 
to its favours. No impurity can enter into its purity. This 
book in reality is an alchemy. Other then this, to name 
anything as alchemy, is nothing but shameful. 



xviii 



0' my dear! You should know that as the 
alchemy of gold is not found in the cottage of every old 
iady rather it is found in the treasures of the highly rich 
persons and the kings. Likewise the alchemy of eternal 
bliss is also not found everywhere. Rather it is found in 
the Divine treasure. The Divine treasure in the heavens 
is the beings of the angels and on the earth the hearts of 
the Prophets. Whosoever will search them anywhere 
except the court of Prophethood he will go astray and 
ultimately will be defrauded. He will be getting nothing 
but vain fancy. His poverty will become apparent on the 
Day of Judgment. The whole creation will know his false 
coins and everyone will come to know that he had no 
sense. He will hear the voice:- 

We have removed from the thy veil so thy 
eye is like the steel today. 

The biggest mercy of the Most Merciful of all the 
mercifuls is that He sent one lack twenty four thousand 
Prophets (peace be upon all of them) in the world to 
teach the device of this alchemy and to tell them to put 
the cash coin of heart in the anvil of hardship and to 
teach them the way of reformation of the bad morals 
that cause density and impurity of heart and the way of 
filling the heart with the good morals. As Allah Almighty 
praised Himself by His own Glorification and 
Sovereignty so He declared His attribute of sending of 
the Prophets [and the Messenger (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him)] and referred it as an obligation of 
Him on the creation. Allah Almighty says: 

Glorifies all that is in the heavens and on 
the earth for Allah, the King, the Sacred, 
the Mighty, the Wise. It is He Who sent 
among the unlettered a Messenger (peace 



xix 



and blessings of Allah be upon him) from ! 

among themselves who recited to them 

His . revelations and purified them and 

taught them the Book and the Wisdom. 

And prior to it they were definitely in 

ignorance manifest. (62 : 1,2) 

The word "yuzakkihim" refers to the same bad 
morals which are the quality of the animals and from 
which the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) gets them released. The words 
Yu'allimuhumul kitaaba wa'1-hikmata refer to it that he 
should make them wear the dress of the attributes of 
angels. And the object of the Alchemy is that a man 
should become pure from all harmful and uncalled for 
things and should be adorned with the attributes of 
perfection. The biggest of all the alchemy is that one 
should turn his face from the world and become 
attentive to Allah Almighty as has been taught to the 
Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him): 

Wazkurisma rabbika wa tabattal Wayhx 

tabteelaa. 

So remember the name of thy Lord and 
devote thyself with a complete devotion. 
(73 : 8) 

Tabteelaa means the disconnection from all 
besides Allah Almighty and to leave oneself completely 
surrendered before Allah Almighty. This is the brief 
description of this alchemy. Its details are lengthy and 
know no bounds. But its title is to know four things, its 
essential elements are to know four dealings, and each 
essential element has got ten basic rules. The four titles 
are: 



XX 



(1) . Knowing one's own self; 

(2) . Knowing the Almighty Allah; 

(3) . Knowing the reality of .the world; and 

(4) . Knowing the reality of the Hereafter. ' 

To know the above four things is in fact the title 
of knowing the Islam of a man. But the affairs of the 
essential elements of Islam are four. 

The two essential elements relate to the outerself 
(zahir) and the two are related to innerself (batin). 

The two essential elements relating to the 
outerself are: 

(1) . To obey the commands of Allah Almighty. These 

are called the acts of worship {'Ibadat). 

(2) . To keep them in view in the matter of one's 

movements and livelihood. These are called the 
dealings {Mu'amalaat). 

The two essential elements relating to the 
innerself (batin) are: 

(1) . To keep the heart purified from all bad morals 

like anger, miserliness, arrogance, pride, self 
appreciation etc. These morals are called 
muhlikaat and 'aqabaat (the dark and narrow 
places where people become victim of robbers) in 
the way of faith. 

(2) . To adorn the heart with good morals like 

patience, gratitude, love, hope, confiding, etc. 
These morals are called munajjiyaat. 
The first essential element in which there is 
mention of 'ibadat consists of ten foundations. They are: 

(i) In the matter of beliefs of Ahl al-Sunnah; 

(ii) In the matter of seeking knowledge; 



xxi 



(Hi) In the matter of cleanliness; 

(iv) In the matter of prayer; 

(v) In the matter of Zakat; 

(vi) In the matter of fasting; 

(vii) In the matter of Hajj; 

(viii) In the matter of recitation of the Holy 
Qur'an; 

(ix) In the matter of remembrance, invocations, 
and formulae; and 

(x) In the matter of sequence of formulae. 

The second essential element relating to the 
mutual dealings discipline has also ten foundations, viz.: 

(i) Manners of taking meals; 

(ii) Manners of marriage; 

(iii) Manners of trade and vocations; 

(iv) Manners of seeking the lawful; 

(v) Manners of companionship; 

(vi) Manners of seclusion; 

(vii) Manners of journey; 

(viii) Manners of poetry and ecstasy; 

(ix) Manners of enjoining good and prohibiting 
evil; and 

(x) Manners for the rulers and the ruled. 

The third essential element relating to the 
muhlikaat (destructive elements) has also v ten 
foundations, viz,: 

(i) Manners of self discipline; 

Manners of cure of over-indulgence in food 
and sex; 

Manners of cure of talkativeness and the 
evils of the tongue; 



(U) 



xxii 

(iv) Manners of cure of anger and arrogance 
and false esteem; 

(v) Manners of cure of love of the world; 

(vi) Manners of cure of love for property; 

(vii) Manners of cure of pomp and esteem; 

(viii) Manners of cure of show and hypocrisy; 

(ix) Manners of cure of haughtiness and 
loftiness; and 

(x) Manners of cure of pride and negligence. 
The fourth, essential element relating to 

munajjiyaat (saviours) has also got ten fundamentals, 
viz.: 

(i) Repentance; 

(ii) Patience and gratitude; 
(Hi) Fear and hope; 

(iv) Poverty and asceticism; 

(v) Intention, sincerity, and truthfulness; 

(vi) Devotion and self-accountability; 

(vii) Contemplation (to ponder upon); 

(viii) Unity of God and trusting in Him; 

(ix) Love of God; and 

(x) Death and its remembrance. 

This is the list of the essential elements and the 
fundamentals of the book Kimya-i-Sa'adat. We shaH 
explain the four titles and forty fundamentals clearly and 
would restrain our pen from indulging in difficult phrases 
and niceties so that this book becomes easily 
understandable. It is so because anyone who wants to 
do research or to go deep into the niceties may consult 
and study. our Arabic books like Ihya al-Vlum, Jawahir 
al-Qur'an or other compilations on this discipline. The 



xxiii 



objective of this book is to make this discipline to the 
masses and common people as some people had 
requested that this discipline be written in Persian so that 
they may understand it. May Allah Almighty grant purity 
to my intention and their intention and we may remain 
untainted of any formality and we may hope Allah's 
mercy being sincere seekers of it. May Allah open for us 
the doors of His reward. May His help remain available 
to us. May our actions conform our words. The reason is. 
that a word not acted upon goes waste. To say and not 
to act upon will bring loss and calamity on the Day of 
Judgement. We seek refuge to Allah from it. 



TO GET TO KNOW ONE'S SELF 



Dear friends! beware that to get to know one's 
self is the key to the realisation of Allah's Divine order 
Hence it has been stipulated by Him that:- 

<'•■■."•■.:•.'.'■■-.,- 

He, who has recognised his ownself, so 
certainly he recognised his Lord. 

(or : 3u*Uij^.) i. j^ji £\ 

We shall show them Our signs in the 
horizons and in themselves, till it is clear to 
them ,that it is the truth.... (41 : 53) 

Oh, dear one, nothing in this entire world is nearer to 
you than 'thyself. Therefore if you would not try to be 
cognisant of your own being i.e. of yourself what else 
would you try to look in vain for? If you think that 'we 
reckon and recognise our selves,' then you are surely 
mistaken.' As, such knowledge can not possibly be of 
any use. It can under no circumstances be the key to 
the 'Ma'rafat', to the human attempt to the cognisance 
of the Supreme Lord and the Master of the universe. 
For, like this, even the animals know of themselves. 
They too can make out such visible parts of their body 



l 



2 



as their head, their mouth, their hands, their feet and 
their flesh etc, whereas you know of your other self to 
the extent that you take your meals when you are 
hungry, pick a bone with some body when you are 
angry and when sex urges overpower you, you enter 
into matrimony. Hence, what is the difference between 
you and these animals? In fact what you should know 
is, as to what you are, who you are, from where have 
you come and where will you go? What is the reason 
of your having come here? For what purpose were 
you created by the Lord? What, in short, is good for 
you and what is bad for you? 

Even the birds and the beasts are endowed with 
the qualities you possess, besides some characteristics 
of the Satan. Yet, there are traits of your character in 
which you and the angels are at par. What, then are 
your transient and permanent features? What is your 
genesis, the essence? So, unless you get to grips with 
these vital 'basics' about yourself, you will not be able 
to attain the status of the blessed. 

Each one of these qualities has it own distinct 
food' that nourishes it, sustains and promotes it's 
growth, resulting in the promotion of goodness and the 
approved behaviour. The betterment of the animals, as 
one would observe, lies in eating, drinking and in 
being healthy and strong. Therefore, if you should thus 
consider that you are also an animal; then you should 
follow their suit day in and day out, fill your belly to 
the brim and fulfil your carnal desires to the utmost. 

Assault and battery are the principal 
characteristics of the animals of the jungle. It naturally 



3 



behoves them to do so; Whereas the evil, its 
ramifications, villainous deeds and the treachery are 
the signs and symbols of the devil. So, if you think you 
are also one of these Satans, you should please your 
heart by following in their footsteps. On the other 
hand, unlike the animals and the beasts, to seek the 
magnificence of Allah is food for the souls of the 
angles. And if you are from the angles you should, like 
them, try to behold the glory of Allah, so that you are 
freed from immoral sensual pleasures and arrogant 
anger on your fellow men. 

Engrain the spirit in you then, to search for the 
truth in yourself. Do so with such dedication that you 
may realise that the uniform qualities created by Allah 
between you, the animals, the birds of prey and the 
beasts are for the common good, not, in order that 
you too may become beastly and atrocious. The 
animals, birds and the beasts have been made to serve 
you. 

The discerning and the cognoscenti have 
termed this status 'of being in the path of God and 
before Allah' as 'Janib-e-Ilahyat'. People call it 
Paradise. As such, it is your duty to become fully alive 
to the great, virtuous intrinsic worth instilled in you by 
Allah so that you may attain His 'Marafat'. Indeed, he 
is the most unfortunate person, who, despite knowing 
the value of 'Deen' (The creed of Islam) happens to 
remain away from it. 

Dear friend, if you sincerely wish to have an 
insight into your inner self, know that Allah has 
produced you of two things viz the outer structure, the 
body which is visible to the naked eye and the inner 



4 



self railed the *Nafs\ *Dil or Jan' (the heart or soul). 
However, they can be seen through the eyes of the 
Batin i.e. by the other invisible, unobvious self. This 
va*y verity is the main thing, the inviolable basis, the 
prime meaning of existence. All other things are 
subservient to it i.e. the heart. Hence when we talk of 
speaking our heart out, we really mean, the truth. 
Sometimes it is called the 'Soul' or the 'Rooh'. 
Sometimes it is termed as the 'Nafs'. The 'DiP, the 
heart does not mean that lump of flesh situated in the 
left side of the human body which the animals too 
possess and even the dead has for that matter. This 
'Dil' i.e. the heart is the real undeniable fact for 
mankind. It is the unique, genuine and prime truth 
which though manifest can not be perused by the 
human eyes. It pertains to the realm called the 
'Shahadat'. It is a lofty domain. The goodness emerges 
from it in all its splendour! 

Summum bonum, this lump of flesh, the heart 
is the knight-rider of the body. The rest of the body is 
its force de combat. The heart is the king and the high 
official of this force. It's principal duty is the attainment 
of the 'Marafat' of Allah,' the perception and 
acquisition of His sublime beneficence due to the 
inherent characteristics bestowed by Him in the man's 
heart to this effect. It throbs in His love. All the time it 
is vocal, reciting His prajse, that He alone, He alone is 
worthy of being worshipped. Only He, it is 
continuously intoning, has the power to grant mercy or 
levy punishment on His people. Retribution and 
reward are only His prerogative. He along can bless or 
bar. Thus, in whole- heartedly striving to possess the 
'Marafat' of Allah is the key to this goal. 



5 



Oh dear friend, you should understand that you 
should get to evaluate it, since yourself is an invaluable 
gem par excellence. It has angelic kinship. The highest 
zenith is it's haven. It is a noble way farer on the path 
to the ultimate exalted goal of Allah. In this short 
journey through life it remains in trade and agriculture 
and other vocations while travelling onwards all the 
time. 

Dear friend, understand that unless you cast a 
glance within yourself, you will not be able to 
comprehend the truth about 'Dil'. Once you get to 
fathom the heart, thereafter you should search for it's 
'Lashkar', the army i.e. its invincible force. Then try to 
recognise the link between the 'Marafat' and 'Sa'adat' 
viz Allah's blessings. The grandeur of the heart can not 
be denied as such in comparison, to the superficial 
body which is like a wooden frame, a mere dormant 
infrastructure. It is nothing. It is like the dead. By 'Dil' 
i.e. the heart we mean the veracity of the soul, the 
'Rooh'. Without 'Rooh' the body is dead and 
cadaverous. 

Should one close his eyes for a while and 
banish all thoughts of his physical being, erstwhile fully 
visible to sight and get engrossed in search of his self, 
his soul, he would find his quest. Indeed, the real 
quest worth making is that of the heart. It would also 
apprise him of the hereafter. Barring whatever is to the 
contrary, he would simultaneously realise the 
immanence f the heart. 

What is 'Dil'? What are the heart's special 
characteristics? The 'Shariat', the Faith does not permit 
its academic debate. Hence Rasoolulah (peace and 



6 



blessings of Allah be upon him) and His Sahabah have 
not broached the issue whereupon the following verses 
were proclaimed by Allah. 

(Ad : Ji*Tj--l^j) ' 

And they ask thee concerning the Spirit. 
Say, the Spirit is a command of my Lord. 

(17:85) 

Behold, His are creation and the 
command... (7:54) 

In the realm of the 'Khalq', the creation and 
that of the 'Amr,' the ordination is completely different 
from each other. In 'Khalq' the elements of 
dimensional measurement, the quantity and mass are 
imminent. In the dictionary the meaning of 'Khalq' 
refers to estimation. But the heart of the man can not 
be put to this test, as it does not accept division. If the 
heart could be divisible, the premise could hojd good, 
whereby it could either be a sage or a complete novice 
on an issue, at a time. Thus, a person being an 'Alim' 
and 'Jahil' (the wise and the ignorant) simultaneously is 
inconceivable. In antithesis, though 'Rooh' too has 
been created by Allah, it is likewise utterly indivisible, 
nor has it any relationship to the code of the mass, the 
measurement or the quantification. The 'Amr' is Allah's 
manifest and paramount. 

Also, those who consider 'Rooh' to Be 
something which is far distant and ancient, having 
span, »r« all wrong. How can the span which is 



7 



circumscribed, not be subject to limitation and 
authority? When the 'Rooh' is veritably genuine and 
overriding, how can the physical frame, the body 
overrule the 'Rooh', the soul? As such how can 'Rooh' 
be the 'Arz' or the span? 

Similarly, those who have called the 'Rooh' the 
'Jism', the body, are self-contradicting and as such, 
deceived. Surely, the body can be disintegrated into 
fragments but not the 'Rooh', the soul, which is 
indivisible as aforementioned. Raising a finer point on 
the issue, the 'Rooh' in the animals is supposed to be 
dispelled in its final qualms but the real 'Rooh' which 
we call the 'Dil\ the heart, is the grand castle of Allah's 
'Marafat' but the animals are devoid of it. 'Rooh' is 
neither physical body nor span but is a pure angelic 
gem whose assessment is difficult, not allowed to be 
broached or amplified. It's research is also very 
arduous and thus confined. One can only have a fair 
knowledge of it within the prescribed parameters. 

( H : J^'j 

But those who struggle for Our sake, We 
shall 1 guide them to Our ways.... (29 : 69) 

( r\ : /jiJi) * > d ! ^ 

None knows the hosts of thy Lord but He. 

(74:31) 

The above Ayah-e-Mubaraka viz this Quranic 
verse clearly signifies that the heart has been 
specifically earmarked for the 'Akhirat', the Hereafter. 
The yearning for the blessings of Allah is its objective. 



8 

These blessings are dependent on the 'Marafat-e-IIahi'. 

of a th^? 6tS ^ idea ,° f aUth ° r 0r the P rod «cer 
of man help him adjudge them, their worth The 
subHme Creator's works of the wonders of the worW 
each ingenious and unique in it own forte can however 

onluT^K^ admired f ° r their charm 
only through the acumen of 'Zahir-o-Batin' i.e. 2 

iSTS ^ lntem , al P ° tenti ^ ° f ^cernment in man. 
The ostensible qualities of perception and penetration 

taLT ^ b f ,y fUnCti ° nS in COnfrast *. aid 
target of the heart is the 'Marafat' of Allah which can 

not be superficially achieved. The sensory capabilities 
of the body are thus the noose, whereas the body is 
the upholder and the carrier of the both, the noose 
and the rider. Hence the uniting frame is a pre- 
requisite for the heart which is made up of water, mud 
and heat. Therefore it is not so strong. It is exposed to 
the danger of death gravely due to the dearth of 
requisite food in the 'Batin' and in 'Zahir' i.e. due to 
the inner and outer wants owing to the elements like 
he beast like fire and water, as the basic evolutionary 
ngredients in man. Therefore, it naturally craves for 
food to eat and water to drink. No wonder, it has all 
along felt the need for these two forces to combat the 
physical enemies on the one hand and the greed and 
the anger on the other. These are foes of the 'Batin' 

T^S* . Zu C °? eS the 6SSenCe of ,Rooh '' «»«n «'s 
Lasnkar (The force) and thereafter the 'Jihad* (The 

Battle foj. Allah) against these wicked forces of 'Batin' 

.V CI k!' , fii ;l comes the essence of 'R oh\ then it's 

r2?T Iu e J° rCe) and thereafter 'Jehad' (The 
Rattle for Allah) against these wicked forces of 'Batin' 



9 



Since it was not possible to ask for the unseen 
things and pursue an unseen foe of both the body and 
the 'Batin' (The inner self. Good or bad), hence the 
need for these sensory organs of the body and the 
sensibilities of the 'Batin', the inner self became 
necessary. Seeing, smelling, tasting, touching and 
hearing are the- basic sensory organisms of the body. 
Each one of them performs a singular duty. If any one 
of them goes awry, it will hamper things and the 
matters of the 'Din-io-Dunya' i.e. this world and the 
hereafter will be affected. These forces of the 'Zahir-o- 
Batin' are under control of the heart. Allah in His 
Supreme wisdom has made them subservient to the 
heart: as per His sublime pleasure, so that they may 
take care of the human body. It is so that the heart 
may get its reward, fetch it's prey, be blessed and in 
consequence accomplish its bargain for the 'Akhirat', 
the Hereafter. These forces of the good serve with 
much marked devotion, as the angles do, and take 
profound pride in obeying the Allah in profound 
delight. They never act against His wishes. 

The details about the heart are rather lengthy. 
Dear friend, to quote a simile, the body is like a city. 
The hands and the feet are like workmen in this city. 
The desire is its prime- mover. The anger is the city 

'Kotwal' i.e. it's police chief. The heart is it king and 
the reason it's 'Wazir', the Prime Minister. The king 
needs all of them to run the government but the lust 
which is a strong motivating force, is evil and 
provocating. On the other hand, the 'Ration' which is 
like the wise 'Wazir' always opposes him, so that the 
funds of the government are not misappropriated or 
usurped. The anger, like the mischief mongering city 



10 



*Kotwal\ the chief of the police is always diversive and 
reactionary. He tends to be sadistic. Under the 
circumstances, the king, who is above them all; takes 
stock of things firmly, consults his 'Wazir', and does 
not allow matters to go out of his hand. It clearly 
indicates that desire and anger play their respective 
subversive roles and to nip the evil in the bud becomes 
the prime duty of the king. That is the position of the 
heart. 

f ood a "d water have been provided by the 
God Almighty to protect the body. As such, they are 
the servants of the body. The body, in turn has been 
created to hold and bear the burden of the 'Hawas' i e 
these discerning agents of the sensations, hence they 
act as the servants of the body. The 'Hawas' — these 
sensory capabilities, are as such the watch dogs of the 
reason to assimilate facts for the discernment and true 
appreciation of Allah's amazing, awe-inspiring 
creations The Ration, on its part in meant to act as 
their torch-bearing, glowing path finder — the guide 
to enable man to relish blissfully the unique splendour 
of His Jamal' - His Beauty par excellence, in what 
He has evolved and designed out of nothingness, in 
this universe. So, if this is the 'Eden of the heart', the 
Aql , the ration is its maid-servant. Nitty gritty, as soon 
as the man's heart becomes fascinated in this manner 
and enchanted by His glory, he becomes the blessed 
servant of Allah. This is depicted in the Holy verse. 

OjX& tft- w ,Jl)l j ^Ji 

I have not created jinn and men but to 
serveMe. (51:56) 



11 



Allah thus gave man the heart and its kingdom 
to reign over. He provided him with the army — the 
force to do so, also the wherewithal to ride, in order to 
make him rise to the higher grounds of grandeur. 
Therefore if any one wants to live up to the lofty grace 
of this exalted position and wishes to honour his 
pledge to the Allah the Almighty, to obey Him like a 
humble servant, he should worship Him with his heart 
and soul, and he should traverse on the path 
prescribed to this effect. Under the circumstances, he 
should install himself on the throne of the king and 
make the 'Bargah-e-Raboobiyat' — viz to be in Allah's 
presence his ultimate aim and 'Kaaba'. He must follow 
his heart, do good deeds and consider the 'Akhirat' 
i.e. the Hereafter as his real country of permanent 
abode. As such, he should treat this world as transient, 
a temporary passage for Journey through life, for final 
rendezvous with Allah. He should consider the body 
the riding gear, hands and feet the servants, the ration 
the *Wazlr' and the invigilator of the worldly affairs. He 
should take the anger, the bad temper to be the 
furious 'Kotwal'. And he should utilise his God-gifted 
five senses as his intelligence agents. He should 
likewise use his brain to sift the evidence thus obtained, 
and safeguard himself from all evil pitfalls and dangers 
in his way. The 'Wazir' of his, his ration, should 
similarly be made to oversee that all is well within his 
domain and that his force, his army does not revolt 
against him. He must chalk out such programmes that 
his charge remains a haven of peace. Thus he will 
deserve blissful boon and rich rewards from Allah. So 
much so, that he will soon don the crdwn of success 
promised to the faithful by Him. Otherwise he will be 
rated amongst those who are criminals and traitors. 



12 



Such a wretched person will be takon ♦ i 
raging retribution Jibe his bt. ° ** and 

Consequently, one should deduce that ,,u 

Principal categories in man, viz:- 38 ° f 

ft) The characteristics of the beasts. 
»; The angelic qualities. 
(Hi) The Satanic vices. 
(M The traits of the animals. 

subi^ *? ? nC6 ' * he human ™kes hirn 

subject to unholy impluses while the normal urges Z 

«Z I""? 9 ' dri f nS ^ to thc «™t 

reml ^ '"^ ako P0SSessed by animals 

bZL C ° m T n t0 b ° th - 0n the oth <" handle 
beast-like qualities of man of attacking and rendina his 

uncontrollab e rage, resulting in serious altercations 

In contra-distinction, the ration, the wisdom in 
man p romp ^ him< tQ do ^ 

underlying ob ective of doing the good and forestalling 
the bad, to please God. Such a person promotes the 
education of people, helps them in many ways and is 
generally a ministering angel for his fellow men. He 



13 



appreciates the Divine truth and considers ignorance 
and boorish behaviour undersirable. 

As such, these particular inclinations of 
character can be broadly symbolised with the 
scoundrelly hound-like trends; the swine-like ways, the 
Satanic vices and angelic habits. The dog for instance 
in not ugly to see, but is apt to be unruly by habit. So 
much so, that at times it starts barking at its own kind. 
In the same manner the pig is not the ugliest of the 
creatures but it is generally abhorred owing to its latent 
craze for the dirty and the defiled things. The very 
word swine is a severe word and an anathema. The 
Satan and the dog are similarly situated. The man also 
has these traits. This is what is meant by 'Shaitaniat'. 
It's antonym is 'Malookiyat'. These terms mean being 
Satanic or being angel like, respectively. 

That is why the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) stated that "a devil is 
virtually present in each person. I also am not immune 
to him but Allah, the Merciful has superimposed and 
overpowered Me over him. He is helpless." 

Likewise, man is under orders and obligation to 
try and overcome the swine of lust and licentiousness 
and the cur of carnage and wild infuriation. The man 
should therefore countermand all that is wicked and 
vicious. Undoubtedly, one who does so will be 
honoured with such rewards by Allah, which accrue to 
such outstanding behaviour. Vice versa, the ugly habits 
of bad charactrer wil lead him to ill fortune and 
punishment by Allah. 

One can visualise the condition of such a 



14 



person. He would find himself standing hand-cuffed in 
humility before the dog, the swine or the Satan It 
stands to reason that if a Mussalman is handed over to 
a •Kafir' viz an infidel, the treatment that will be meted 
out to him is obvious. And if an angel is handed over 
to the swine, the cur or to the Devil, his condition 
would be worse than that of the Mussalman. To his 
utter dismay and chagrin the man accursed with the 
trait of worldly wrath will find himself in the shape of a 
horrid hound or a wolf and the one prey to the life's 
lust will see himself in the form of a swine, on the Day 
of the Judgement. If a wolf is similarly seen in a dream 
by some one, it would mean that the man is a tyrant. 
In the case of the pig one can infer that he is dirty and 
degraded. The remoter a person gets from them and 
their like, the more his 'Soorat and Seerat' i.e. the 
general demeanor and inner self will conform to how 
he conducts himself. 



Now that we know of the orderers, these order- 
givers of the 'Batin', cast your eyes within on your 
inner self and try to assess for yourself as to which of 
them have influenced you the most and where you are 
situated. Beware that your acts and deeds will create in 
you a corresponding trend of character which will 
make or mar you. Indeed nothing but the good 
emerges out of the good. Vice versa, if you are 
obedient to the swine of desire, you will have similar 
habits of profanity, shamelessness, avarice, flattery, 
dWiness and that of being happy over the wickedness 
of the others. However if you succeed in suppressing 
the swine; getting the better of him, you will be 
crowned with the qualities of contentment, grace, 
wisdom, piety and selflessness etc. 



15 



In case you are overtaken by the hound of 
horror and dread, then the damaging traits that will 
develop in you, will be those of being rash and 
unmindful of consequences, impurity, bragging, 
arrogance, wanton flaunting of your faults, taunting 
and torturing others, picking up fights and squabbles 
with others. Nevertheless, if you prevail over this dog 
of destruction, you will acquire the added qualities of 
patience, sauvity, forgiveness, stability, bravery, 
tranquility and saintliness. 

If likewise you will obey the devil whose prime 
task is to aid and abet the cur and the swine: to 
mislead people by their nefarious designs, to resort to 
trouble making, dishonesty and adulteration etc. you 
yourself would inherit these devilish habits from him. 
But if you are able to defeat him by not being taken in 
by his guiles and keep on fortifying your forces of the 
ration and the good, you will attain wisdom, 'Marafat', 
knowledge, 'Hikmat' i.e. profound sagacity, capability 
and 'Husn-e-Akhlaq' i.e. the 'Character Beautiful'. 
These noble traits will be your constant companions 
and guides. They will sow the seed of your good 
fortune with veritable grounding of good memories of 
you, for ever. 

In contrast, the bad deeds are called 'Gunahs', 
the vices. In their contra-distinction the good deeds are 
called 'Ibadat', the worship of God. The heart is like a 
luminous looking glass. The evil ways are like clouds 
and darkness. The bad character, sullies and darkness 
the mirror of the heart. A person having such a 
character can never have the benign blessings of the 
•Deedar-e-Ilahi'. He can not be blessed with the 



16 



blessing of sublime view of His beneficience. Verily a 
bfty integrity of character is like light or 'Noor* The 

fu . (PeaCe and b,essin ^ s of Allah be upon 
nim) has therefore said, 



l^MJ i^Jl ^J-| 



"One should perform a good deed after a 
bad one so that it may remove its bad 
effect." 

h»A n *?' Z ne Si !?? 16 t** ™ a 9 ood < soon ) a^r a 
bad one. Only he will blessed who will come purified of 

evil On the Day of Judgement a man's heart will either 
blessed ° r 3 With 3 Shini " 9 face wiU be 

Except for him who comes to Allah with a 
sincere heart. (26 : 89) 

Right from the beginning of creation man's 
heart * lid Iike ^ of ^ ^ ^ ^ J- s 

made One can see the entire universe in it, provided 

^Ifil^t 9 r ded and not aI1 °^d to be 
tarnished. The Almighty Allah has ordained so. 

No indeed; what they have been earning 
has rusted upon their hearts. (83 : 14) 

Dear friend, you may say that since man also 
possesses the traits and the characteristics of the beaste. 



17 



devils and the animals, then how come the angel like 
qualities are his assets while the other things are 
transient? How can one ascertain that the man has 
been created to have the 'Akhlaq-e-Malaika', the 
character of the 'Malaika* — the angels, and in reality 
he has nothing to do with other things? The answer 
lies in the irrefutable fact that the man has been 
created as 'Ashraful Makhlooqat' (the most superior of 
all Allah's Creations). Thus he is superior to the 
animals and the beasts. No doubt, the stature 
bestowed by Allah on each thing is the culmination of 
His kindness to it. For example the horse is superior to 
the donkey as the donkey only carries weight, whereas 
a horse gallops bravely in the battle, in 'Jehad' (war in 
the cause of the Allah) to the consummate command 
of the knight-rider, although in its own forte the horse 
can also carry weight as the donkey does. Hence there 
is a marked difference between them. If the horse did 
not have these qualities and a more graceful bearing, 
it's stature would also have been reduced to that of the 

v 

donkey, to all intents and purposes. 

Similarly, some people think that they have 
been made to eat, drink and fulfil their urge for the 
other sex. People of this kind whither away all their life 
in such hapless pursuits. There are others who believe 
that they have been produced oniy to belittle, degrade 
and overpower their adversaries and their fellow 
beings. The winner or the vanquished, force majeure is 
applied to gain supremacy over them, whether they be 
the Arabs, the Turks or the Kurds. Obviously both of 
these ideologies are wrong, since the aforementioned 
life of only eating, drinking and sexual conjugation is 
despondent on the element of desire. Even the animals 



18 



have such desires. 

The camel is well known for its quality to 
consume huge quantities of food and water, whereas 
the pig and the sow have above-normal carnal 
capabilities. How come then that the man is regarded 
higher in status to them? 

Also, the drive to overcome and subjugate 
others is due to a rising temper, the anger. This natural 
phenomenon is also present, it may be argued, in the 
grazing animals and the wild creatures of the forests. 
Hence, again how come the man is superior to them? 
Where is the difference, the distinction? The answer is 
self explanatory viz despite it, the redeeming quality 
the man has in comparison is, that the man in Supra- 
Creation is blessed with ration, with which he also 
recognises his Supreme Master, the Allah. It also 
enables him to voluntarily appreciate and admire His 
handiwork, His creative genius. It also helps him to 
defeat his mortal enemies, the human wrath and the 
greed. These are the characteristics of the angels. Their 
very qualities make him rise above the birds, the beasts 
and the animals. Hence he is superior to all things 
created. He has a conspicuous edge over them. All of 
them are at his beck and call. He is 'Ashraf-ul- 
Makhlooqat', the best of all things created. 

(ST: o'UjJl) 

And He has subjected to you whatever is 
in the heavens and whatever is in the 
earth, all from Him.... (45 : 13) 



19 

As such, the man's greatness lies in the 
greatness of his integrity, to the extent he excels in the 
stipulated virtues, the grand finale being the 'Marafat' 
of Allah. The rest of the traits pale down in 
comparison, although innumerable noble motivating 
forces have been bestowed on him for his glory. As 
such, it is food for thought that when man dies, the 
evil salients like the desire and anger also die. 
Summum bonum, what remains is a 'gem' of high 
quality which is ornate in a seraphic manner with the 
'Marafat' of Allah. It is his constant companion.- This 
gem is also the friend of the angels, who always 
remain humbly prone, prostate is worship before Him, 
all the time. 

(0© : ^Xl* S-^fi '{j 

On a 1 seat of truth, in the presence of an 
Omnipotent King. (54:55) 



Or when a man dies the remnant with him is a 
dark blind thing — black and tarnished on account of 
his vices; but blind because- of the absense of the anger 
and arrogance which used to soothe and satisfy his 
ego. As a result of it, he dwells in this lowly realm 
inherited from the former region, thereafter. 

Couldst thou see the criminals hanging 
their heads before their Lord. (32 : 12) 



20 



It means that he will be in such a state when he 
will in consequence be sent to the 'Sijjeen' with the 
Satan. The interpretation of the term 'Sijjeen' is not 
known to all. Hence the Allah has ordained that:- 

(A : jjiikjl) V^u'^iuj 

And what teaches thee what the Sijjin is. 

(83: 8) 

The wonders of the world of the heart are 
unlimited. The exalted status, the veritable pedestal of 
piousness which the heart has vis a vis all the organs of 
his body is on account of the fact that the heart is 
novel per se but most people are unmindful of it. The 
grandeur of the heart and its piety is on account of two 
principal reasons. 

(0 Due to Urn', the knowledge 

(ii) Owing to Qudrat i.e. its redeeming sagacity. 

The greatness due to 'Ilm' is in turn owing to 
two causes. One is known to all, viz it is self-evident 
while the other is hidden, nice and subtle. No one can 
fathom it. 

The capacity and the power of the heart to 
assimilate knowledge with all its intricacies is within its 
scope. Although it is indivisible it can read and 
comprehend numerology, arithmetic, medicine, 
astrology, 'Ilm-e-Shariat' etc., easily. It encompasses all 
forms of education, which are contained in the heart 
like sand is in the desert. Within no time it covers the 
distance from the Earth to the Sky and from the East 
to the West due to its continuous movement and 



21 



sagacity: although it is on the ground, it measures the 
far reaches of the vast horizons and is aware of all stars 
and constellations in the galaxy and the distance 
between them. It takes out the fish from the water by a 
tackle; shoots the birds down from the sky to the earth 
below, makes the animals like the camel, horse and 
the elephant obey it's command. The five, sensory 
perceptions of the body are it's vocation. It is evident 
that all of them are directed towards his heart. They 
are the doors to discernment in the 'Alam-e-Roohani' 
(the realm of the angels or that of the soul) a door is 
open in the heart. Most people, on the other hand 
only care about the 'Alam-e-Jismani', the physical 
district and consider these physical sensibilities as the 
only course to the attainment of knowledge. 

Actually, these two doors are rather small, 
nevertheless there are many doors in the heart which 
are open to receive many 'Uloom' i.e. many kinds of 
education. Of the two premises, let us take the first i.e. 
when the man goes to sleep and has a dream, these 
sensory organs become dormant but the door of the 
heart opens up, win the result that in 'Alam-e-Arwah' 
i.e. the realm of the 'Rooh' and ex 'Loh-e-Mahfooz' viz 
Allah's Book of Record, he starts seeing the things 
destined (of which the God is already aware) or gets to 
know of what is going to happen in future. At times he 
gets indicatory inclinings of things to come for which 
Taabir' or interpretation is sought to be made. This is 
despite the fact that, as a rule, it is thought that he 
who keeps awake is more worthy of the 'Marafat'. Yet 
they realise that generally speaking, there is less 
likelihood of their coming to know these things of the 
«Alam-e-Ghaib' i.e. 'the domain of unknown future* b#' 



22 



dint of these sensory agencies. 

It is not possible to dwell on the subject of these 
dreams in a casual vein but let it suffice to say that the 
heart is like a looking glass and the , Loh-e-Mahfooz' is 
like a mirror in which the pictures of all the things in 
'Alam-e-Maujoodat' i.e. in the world of what is the 
world of the present, can be seen. When the clean 
looking glass is placed facing, the mirror containing 
these facsimiles, they become clearly visible. No 
wonder, that as such, when the heart is like a lucid 
looking glass and one disconnects one's self from the 
deflecting stimuli of these sensations, one gets in close 
proximity to the 'Loh-e-Mahfooz'. As long as the heart 
is filled with such veritable sensations, it strolls around 
in ecstasy in the 'Alam-e-Roohani'. However, in the 
dream these sensations cease but their image or 
'Khayal* lingers. Whereas in 'alam-e-Misal' the feeling 
or the 'Khayal* can be conceived, although at times 
rather dimly. When the man dies the veil is finally 
lifted. There is no perception. No sensations are left. 
The matter gets transparent. The deceased is then 
told:- 

<":3) oi^yisj>3a;i*iiitiia 

9 

Now We have removed from thee thy 
covering, and today thy sight is sharp. 

(50:22) 

He replies. 

Our Lord, we have seen and heard; return 



23 



us and we shall do righteousness; we are 
now sure. (32 : 12) 

The second proof of the door of the heart being 
towards the 'Alam-e-Matakoot' is that there is no one 
who may be immune to prudent thought and pious 
misgivings or fear of the likely straits ahead. Such 
presentiments do not emanate from the senses but 
they emerge from the heart. He does not know the 
origin, the source of these anticipated dangers. This 
analysis confirms that all knowledge does not emanate 
from these sensory feelings. Moreso, as the heart 
actually pertains to the 'Alam-e-Roohani' and not to 
this 'Jahan', this world. Obviously these sensory organs 
have been made for this world. Unless man gets rid of 
this world's mundane considerations, he can not make 
a smooth passage to the next one, where these 
sensory organs would be of no use whatsoever. 

Do not, therefore, misconstrue that unless a 
man goes in to deep slumber or dies, the door of his 
heart to 'Alam-e-Roohani' will not unclose. 

If a man works hard; overco nes arrogant ire, 
purifies himself viz his soul of the evil, closes his eyes, 
sits in a secluded place, exterminates all worldly 
thoughts and engrosses his h eart and soul most 
devotedly in the 'Alam-e-Roohani' in such a manner 
that he does not utter a syllable by his tongue but 
every fibre of it intones AUah, Allah, with every heart 
beat, continuously until he becomes completely 
unaware of himself and the entire world except Allah, 
the door of the blessings in his heart will open up and 



24 



remain open. He would see in the state of wakefulness 
what others would do in sleep. Beautiful souls of the 
angels would descend on him in picturesque shapes 

benefited from them. The heavenly creatures of this 
world and the next of the 'MalakooV J%Z£Jm 
angelhood, would be visible to him. He, XTso 

hilrt T ,d StranSe Vbi0ns and ab «°rmal 

things far beyond his conception. This saying of the 

Holy Prophet (peace and the Blessings of Allah be 

upon him) is about such a person. It elucidates that 

sucMhings are possible without the man being asleep 

"The whole earth was shown to me So I 
saw its Easts and its Wests." 

The following verse from the Holy Book also 
bears on the issue. 

.... ^jOOo^ro^^i^^isj 

And thus We show Abraham the kingdom 
of the heavens and the earth.... (6 . 75) 

The assured beliefs and the sound judgement of 
the prophets were similar. It had nothing to do with 
the Hawas', these senses, rather, the stately 

^ a«T!? u ? * he frUft ° f tnefr ^ d toil the cause 
of Allah. Allah has proclaimed. 



25 



And devote thyself to Him devoutly. 

(73 : 8) 

Indeed when such be the case He sets 
everything right. He alone is All Competent. 

UlT j i'-Ujll 'y> til iJ] U o Juh j j jlxJi i-« j 
<*:Ji>Jt) 

» 

Lord of the East and the West; there is 
no god but He; take Him for a Caretaker. 

(73 : 9) 

Therefore, when you depend upon Him and in 
Him only, then divest all connections with every thing 
other than Him and you will have nothing to worry 
about. 

And bear patiently what they say, and 
forsake them graciously. (73 : 10) 

Such pre-eminent virtue is displayed in the 
strenuous exercise of the steadfast in their indefatigable 
toil and hardiness to be perpetually dutifulness to him. 
It purifies man's heart. He rises above all fears of 
enmity of the people and the luring snares of the 
worldly cares and the cravings. To be the proud 
possessor of such knowledge achieved after such hard 
work, is the enviable good fortune of the singularly 



26 



blessed, the 'Vali'. He is installed on a high pedestal 
The status of the prophets of AUah is nevertheless 
higher to them for obvious reasons. 

Do not however be misled that the acquisition 
of such position applies only to the Allah's Prophets. In 
fact, every person in his own right is capable of it. For 
example, there is no iron, which, due to its own basic 
intrinsic character may not be able to be moulded into 
a mirror in which he may not be able to see the face of 
anything in the world. That, it may later be tarnished 
and sullied is an other thing. Naturally, the worldly 
greed and temptations do a lot of damage to it and 
deface the crystal clear looking glass drastically. Vice is 
such a menace. It is therefore stated in the 'Hadith 
Sharif (the Holy Prophets Sayings may peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) that:- 

"Every child is bom on the true nature. 
Then it is its parents who make him a Jew 
or a Christian.'' 

Now, as regards the capacity and the capability 
of each person, it is clarified that:- 

Am I not your Lord? They said: Yes 

(7:172) 

If we ask a sensible persqn if he is not more 



27 



than one. His answer will be in the affirmative. It is 
such an irrefutable fact that no body can deny it. like 
His creation, His 'Marafat' is consonant with human 
nature, Allah has ordained that:- 

( A V : wi f- >) . • • • &l 'f4& J* 

Arid if you ask them who created them, 
they wiU surely say: " Allah." (43 : 87) 

Allah has further ordained that- 

( r.: fJ >) ^'^'J^'J^'M 

All-devoted-it is Allah's original law on 
which' He originated mankind.... (30 : 30) 

It stands to reason and is confirmed by the 
experience gained through the ages that these matters 
do not pertain to the prophets only as a speciality 
because they too were 'Bashar', (human beings). As 
such Allah has stated that:- 

Say, I am only a mortal like you.... 

Allah opens up and charters such a path for the 
one He wills. Such a person can undertake the task of 
reforming the mankind and the 'Shariyat'. The elite in 
them is called the prophet. The extraordinary and 
supernatural events that occur and emanate from him 
are called the 'Mujizat'. And he, who beckons the rest 
of them on to put them to the right path is called a 
'Vali' (The friend of Allah). In his case such abnormal 



28 

occurrences are termed as 'Karaamaf 



It is however not necessary that such a person 

ass ^r, h ^r h y 

Allah wills what He ^ and «*«>u, task, 

.hat the hard working T», of tne il ""^ 
9 « .he harvest of ^ i^'^htSsT^ 

that matter the seeker may find the sought. 

Each vttal thing has many important nr.. 
requisites. Hence ifs attainment I JZTlZL 
onerous. For treading the measure, fa acLe^'a 

Jtorafat - a position of great honour, one can not do 
wHhout hard dedicated effort and tod and a -Murshad- 
e-Kamil the Guide par excellence. Yet what one is 
finally able jo achieve depends solely on the Allah's 
will. The same applies also the acquisition of the 
Darja-e-Imamah', the status of the 'Imam' In the 
known courses of the esteemed. 



29 



Now that it has been established that the 
'essence' of the being of man lies in his heart, which 
contains the grandeur of the 'Marafat' of Allah, let us 
enquire in to the proposition whether he is also so 
blessed due to the sagacity, the 4 Qudrat' relevant to the 
matter, as referred to herein earlier. The animals, as 
we know, do not possess this greatness. The 'Malaika', 
the angels do. The truth about 'Qudrat', this potential 
of the heart, is that in as much as the 'Malaika', the 
angels have been empowered; for instance, to have 
the rain to fall when people need it, by the Will of 
Allah: to make the refreshing breeze to blow across in 
spring, to make the system of breeding and growth to 
work to will in the wombs of the animals, to have 
green grass grow in dry land in the way the angels 
teams are assigned to do as prescribed duty, in the 
same manner the heart of the man is empowered to 
do so. Man is angel like in nature, in his glory. He is 
'Ashraful Makhlooqat'. 

The body is subservient to human heart. Still 
the body is a world in itself. It is obedient to the heart. 
The heart of the Man is the master. It is a statement of 
fact that neither the heart is in the man's finger nor the 
'Ilm or Iradat', the knowledge or the element of 
intention is contained in it. Still, when the heart gives 
the finger an order to this effect, it obeys the 
instruction given and moves. Likewise, when the heart 
is in anger, the entire body starts perspiring. Sirnilarly, 
when the heart is inspired sexually the relevant organs 
of the body are stirred and affected. Also when the 
heart thinks of eating, the agility in the lower portion of 
the tongue is aroused to serve him. Hence it is evident 
that the heart has superintendence over the entire 



30 



body i.e. the heart is in control of the whole body. 
Therefore, it is essential to know also, whether some 
hearts which possess more glory and are more angelic, 
in addition to their own body can also influence and 
control the bodies of others. The obvipus answer 
springs to the lips that they can do so. For example, if 
such a heart encounters a lion, it will become over 
awed and subdued. Similarly if such a heart were to 
show special compassion for a sick person he would 
recover from the ailment. Vice versa if a sick person 
were to pray for such a heart it would recover. In the 
same vein, should such a person desire that somebody 
should come and see him, he, the latter, would feel a 
strong urge to do so. He would promptly comply. In 
case he prays for rain, it would start raining. This is 
logically possible and is an oft proved fact. 

Casting of a bad eye and 'Sahar', the magic are 
in the some category. In all such things, the 'Nafs' is 
the wonder worker. For example if an ill wishing Nafs 
may, out of jealousy, desire that a certain animal 
should die, such a thing is possible, as has been stated 
in 'Hadith Sharif 

"The (bad) look puts a man into the grave 
and a camel into the cooking pot." 

The power or the 'Qudrat' of the heart to be 
able to perform strange miracles is extraordinary. If 
such events occur from the prophet they are called 
'Mojizat' and if they emanate from a 'Vali' trfey are 
termed as 'Karamat', as aforementioned. Such persons 
remain busy in doing good deeds. However, a bad 



31 

man who does bad things of this order is a 'Sahir' or a 
magician. In short, whether they be 'Mojizat', 'Karamat' 
or *Sahar', all of them are due to the 'Qudraf or the 
power persisting in the heart to perform such miracles. 

If someone has still not been able to understand 
all that has been stated so far viz he has not been able 
to comprehend the *Haqiqat-e-Nabooat' i.e. the verity 
of a prophet, he may eventually do so by verbal 
enquiry. There are many rungs of the accelerating 
status of these venerated persons, the prophets and 
the 'valis'. 'Prophethood' and 'Vilayat' are one of the 
.'Darajas' i.e. positions of honour of the heart. Three 
qualities are obtained from it viz:- 

(i) What others come to know in dreams, they get 
to know while awake. 

(ii) The 'Nafs' of the people only affects and 
influences their own body. But the 'Nufoos' 
(plural of 'Nafs') of such accomplished people 
have an impact on the bodies of others also, but 
in an unobstrusive and placid manner. 

(Hi) Those things of which the others have to 
acquire, knowledge is known to them. 

Since it is also possible that the clean heart of 
such a gifted person amongst them having sharp 
intellect may receive knowledge of many kinds of 
'Uloom' — learnings, it is plausible that the very clean 
heart of a person of this stature having very sharp 
intellect may get to know many more 'Uloom' or even 
acquire comprehensive knowledge of all kinds, 
automatically. Such an 'Ilm' or knowledge is called 
'llm-el-Dunni'. So has Allah stated that:- 



7 



32 



And given knowledge from Ourselves. 

(18 : 65) 

Thus, the persons of such elite status having 
such profound qualities of the aforementioned three 

K^J\ V T " 98 * th ° Se pr °P hets or * A ^-«- 
Karam who are called «Anbia-e*abir' or the 'Aulia-e- 

„n? ? C u rMt Pr ° PhetS ° r the *•* ' Valis '- Those 
nL 7 Ve any ° ne ° f these characteristics but 

The Holy Prohet (peace and the blessings of Allah be 
upon him) possessed all these three grand attributes to 
the very pinnacle, to the absolute zenith of their glory 
conceivable He was the greatest of all. When Allah in 
his benign kindness decided to apprise the mankind of 
. " ww ' of H * Prophethood so that they may 
emulate H»m and follow in His footsteps, He bestowed 
each one of these qualities and many more in full 

? » m ! PeaCe and the bl ^ s of AUah be 
upon h im) . He also granted the gift of the «Rooya-e- 
Sadiqa i.e. the veracity of the true dreams to Him 
(peace and the blessings of Allah be upon him). From 

other L C ° n T d , *? thlnklnS ° f thc P*°Pte> by the 
other He purified their souls and by the third He 
showed them the true path of Allah. 

It is not possible at the same time that one may 
beget the faith in something whose corresponding traX 
may not be present in his heart. It is obvious that if a ' 

nTh!! uf "° T° e ° f S ° mCth,ns in his he «* he wifl 
not be able to have it's facsimile in his soul. That is 

why no one can fully comprehend the 'Haqiqat-e-IIahf 



33 



i.e. the Verity of Allah, He alone and no one else 
knows it, in to. Whatever we have hitherto been able 
to gather is from His 'Ismha-e-Azam' viz His great 
names. In the same light, being unaware of their 
correct standing and stature, in view .of the uncanny 
miracles that occur out of these prophets and the 
Valis', one can only presume their exalted position 
and assume that they may be having many more 
qualities of distinction which we do not possess, and 
there are many others who do not know them. 
Similarly, only the Allah and the Holy Prophet (peace 
and the blessings of Allah be upon him) know about 
the real stature of the 'Rasoolulah' (peace and the 
blessings of Allah be upon him). Hence it can be 
deduced that only a prophet knows about the spiritual 
standing, the 'Darajat' of a prophet. That is all we 
know. It is related as an example about somebody who 
had fallen unconscious, unaware of things and of what 
was going to happen 'tomorrow'. Ironically, when he 
was fully in his senses he was still not cognisant of his 
affairs. Such is the human nature, whether in the 
slumbers of sleep or in the state of consciousness. That 
is why Alklah has stipulated. 

No, but they have given lies to that whose 
knowledge they did not comprehend, and 
whose interpretation has not yet come to 
them.... (10 : 39) 

Allah has further ordained that:- 



34 

And since they are not guided by it, they 
will say, 'this is an old lie.' (46 : 11) 

Hence, do not be astonished if the 'Anbia', the 
prophets have some such special characteristics of 
which people may not be aware. By them they savour 
the delights of many a pleasant and ravishing finery 
and favour of Allah. 

It has been observed, for instance, that as a rule 
a person who has no taste for poetry will also not be 
able to appreciate 'Raga' (A from of classical music). 
Nor can one normally explain to somebody the 
meaning of a couplet who is ignorant of what a verse 
is. Nor can the blind enjoy the sensation of sight and 
colour. Hence one should not be surprised about 
Allah's 'Qudrat' and the prowess. He can and may 
vide the unlimited power that He has, create some 
such fascinating qualities in some of His prophets of 
which the people may not have the slightest idea. 

The foregoing discourse must have provided 
you with a good insight into the significance of the 
obedience vis a vis the 'Soofis'. You may have heard 
some of them remark that 'we are the versatile men of 
this path'. It is likely that you may have disbelieved 
them. You should not have done so, as the statement 
of the 'Soofia' (Plural of soofi, the saint) is correct. 
Your preoccupation and self indulgence may act as a 
veil between you and the truth about them. 



35 



The heart is like a tank or a reservoir of water. 
The 'Hawas-e-Khamsa' the fine sensations of the 
touch, the hearing, speaking, tasting and smelling are 
like five tributaries of lakes which flow into this tank. If 
you want clean water to come out of the bottom of 
this tank you will have to do the following. - 

(i) Remove the dirty water from the tank first. 

(ii) Make sure that dirty water does not enter the 
tank. 

(iii) The bottom of the reservoir should be re-rubbed 
clean. 

(iv) The source i.e. the lakes of the defiled water 
should be closed. 

Likewise, unless the heart of a man is cleansed 
of the external 'Ilm' or learning, the internal 11m' that 
fountains up and gushes forth from within shall cease 
to do so. Albiet, if such external 'Ilm' is erased and the 
outer stimulus of its prosecution stops, there will no 
more be any 'Hijab', or veil in his way. It is possible 
that consequently he may attain the 'Kashf, the 
knowledge of the unknown things. 

The cause of the 'Hijab' can be clarified by 
quoting another example. For instance, if a person 
learns the beliefs and doctrines, say, of the school of 
thought of 'Ahl-e-Sunnat' and receives education and 
instructions on how to argue in its favour and present 
his case on this subject effectively in discussions. He 
dedicates himself to it's cause. For the sake of 
argument let us presume that ostensibly that 'Ilm' is 
right. The result can be foreseen. He will reject as 
incorrect all that is placed before him in any way 



36 



contrary to his beliefs. His heart will not accept it. 
Actually, the real 'Marafat' is the real truth, because the 
various theses propounded are not 'Haqiqat', the truth. 
It may be called a mere infrastructure, just a frame 
having, a void in it. In stark antithesis 'Marafat' Is like 
taking the marrow out of a bone! 

Dear friend, Be aware that an 'Alim' (Recepient 
of Ilm — the knowledge) who learns to find grounds 
and pretexts to pick up quarrels with others in support 
of his beliefs remains a novice, always. He never gets 
to grips with the real facts. So much so, that the day 
he comes to believe that 'only I know all, on the 
subject', this very thought will become a 'Hijab' for 
him. At this stage, he and his like will become 
deprived of the status of merit. Vice versa, an Alim 
who removes such an impediment from his path, in 
the pursuit of 'Ilm', will henceforth not be deterred in 
his passage through the path of learning. He will not 
be beset by 'Hijab'. He may even get the 'Kashf and 
become a man of worthy standing. On the contrary, a 
man with a chequered career, in quest of education 
will suffer long in 'Batil' (that which is not true) and 
unseemly thoughts. Even small doubts will veer him 
away from the right course. An 'Alim' worth his salt 
remains in safety against all such dangers. 

Dear friend, If you come to know of some 
'Sahibe Kashf that 'Ilm' or learning can be a 'Hijab', 
you should try to understand what he is saying and 
not rebut him. Beware that some unethical 
opportunists of the present day have landed, to call 
the immoral the moral. They have learnt certain 
churlish things of some so called 'Soofis' and after 



37 



garnishing their exteriors with the 'Lung', the lion cloth, 
the 'Gudree' a dervishes symbolic coarse bedding and 
with the prayer-mat put together, pretend to serve the 
'Ilm' and the 'Ulema' but in reality they are not the 
saints that they profess to be. They need to be shot 
dead at sight. They are the devils incarnate and the 
enemies of Allah and His Holy Prophet (peace and the 
blessings of Allah be upon him). Allah, His Holy 
Messenger (peace and the blessings of Allah be upon 
him) and his sahaba have always praised the 'Ilm' and 
the 'Ulema'. They have perpetually exhorted the entire 
world to attain 'Ilm', to wit, to acquire knowledge. 
These wretches who have neither any 'Ilm' nor are 
they educated in any way, act as if they have the 
licence to slander and condemn the 'Ilm' and the 
'Ulema'. They are like the ill believers who are not the 
alchemists but when a lot of gold is offered to them 
they do not touch it, make idle boasts and falsely say 
"What use is this gold. What I want is the 'Alchemy' 
which they know not. They remain hungry and poor 
always. Remember that the 'Kashf of the prophets in 
itself is like that of the sentinal of alchemy and that of 
the 'Aulia' is like gold. The possessor of the alchemy is 
naturally superior to that of the gold. 

However, here, there is another relevant point 
worth considering i.e. If a person has only a limited 
quantity of the 'Kemia' (The chyma. Chemical 
compound capable of making gold) good for obtaining 
only two hundered dinar worth of gold, it is not 
superior to the man who has a thousand gold dinars 
with him. There are a lot of books on alchemy, the 
matter is still being discussed continuously, its pursuit is 
still on, but the net result is still elusive. Same is the 



38 



case with many alleged 'Soofis'. They are not real 
•Soofis'. Whatever little they have is not good enough. 
Hence a 'Pseudo-Soofi' or a 'Part-Soofi' of this kind 
has no superiority over the 'Ulema'. Quite a few of 
them are in such a state that they make a start, retard 
in early stages then drop down even from there to 
lower depths. They are of no reckoning. Some of 
them are overwhelmed with craze which has no 
significance. Some of them even start considering that 
they have attained some status of merit, some position. 
Such conjecture on their part is like the dream in 
which the real thoughts and the base ones are 
muddled together. Oh friend, recognise the chartered 
path of the real 'Soofis' and the Tassawuf (Of the 
Soofis). Nevertheless do not be disillusioned, because 
of the so called soofis of today. Thbse who condemn 
and criticise the 'Urn' and the *Ahl-e-Ilm' are not 
sensible people. 

You may perhaps ask as to how the secret of 
man's good fortune and blessings lies in the 'Marafat' 
of Allah. The answer is that one considers that thing 
blessed which he enjoys having or doing. For instance 
the sex urge is fulfilled when one's yearning for it is 
satisfied. The anger finds it's satisfaction in taking 
revenge. The eye finds its quest in seeing something 
beautiful that it really likes. The ear is overjoyed when 
it listens to voices or music of his choice. The joy of 
the heart accordingly lies in the fulfillment of the 
requirement of it's characteristics i.e. for the purpose it 
has been created by Allah. 

The desire and these five sensations are even 
possessed by the animals. The special qualification of 



39 



the heart is to find the real fact, the real truth about 
each thing, each action.Thus man tries to discover the 
fact about what he does not know. He likes to know it. 
When he comes to know it he feels really happy and 
proud of it. For example if one likes to learn to play 
chess. It may perhaps not be in his interest to do so 
but he feels highly pleased and proud when he learns 
to do so. 

Now that you have come to know that the 
hearts delight is in the 'Marafat' of the deeds and things 
under its purview. Add this to your knowledge that the 
better, and the more refined the 'Marafat' of the thing 
to his taste, the more he will enjoy it. Obviously the 
person who becomes the confident of the secrets of the 
'Wazir' will be proud to be so placed. He will however 
be all the more happy to become the confident of the 
king and come to know of the secrets of the kingdom. 
Similarly a master of a astrological numerology who is 
aware of the shape of constellations and things and 
their distance and dimensions in the sky, will be happy 
than the person who plays chess. On the other hand, 
the man who just knows how to cast the chess board 
will be less happier than the man who plays chess. It 
follows*' that the nicer and better a known thing, to 
have it's 'Ilm' or knowledge will be correspondingly 
more delightful. Hence, since Allah is the most 
Supreme of all things and the Grand Emperor of all 
kingdoms of the universe, all beauty and beneficience 
emanate from Him. The wonders of all the worlds are 
on account of Him. Hence, obviously the 'Marafat' of 
no other thing than of Him can be more pious and 
more blissful for the heart. The thought of His 'Deedar' 
surpasses every thing co verted. Indeed that heart is 



40 

sick which has lost the yearning for His Sublime 
'Marafat'. Such a heart can be compared to such a sick 
person who has lost his appetite and instead of having 
a regular meal wants to eat dust. He is also ill, in 
whose heart the malady of desire has taken the place 
of the 'Marafat' of Allah. Such wretched persons are 
sure to die. Abo, since all the desires and the 
components of their satiation emanate from the body, 
hence these desires and their sensations will cease to 
exist, as soon as he dies. As such, all his hard work 
and labour for the fulfilment of these desires will be 
wasted away. The ecstasy of the 'Marafat* of Allah is 
related to the heart and engrained in ft, hence it does 
not die, rather it is doubled after the death of the man. 
The pangs of desire end, instead, far greater joy of the 
'Marafat' of Allah fills his heart. Further details on the 
point will Inshallah be discussed towards the end of this 
treatise. 



The topic of man has been treated rather 
extensively in this book. However, for further details 
please consult the work the 'Ajaibul Quloob'. In reality, 
so vast is the subject of the study of the Self that no 
wonder whatever one may do, he would still feel that 
the discourse is still bagatelle. Naturally the heart of 
man is the main issue. One is therefore rightly apt to 
feel that all that has been discussed and detailed so far 
is merely an infitisimal semblance of some of its so 
many extraordinary traits. The heart is like a museum 
of strange things and grotesque prodigies. So much is 
vested in the internal and the external organs of the 
body of man. There are thousands of veins, flesh, 
tissues and bones which are different in shape and 
their individual characteristics to other parts of the 



41 



body. Yet you do not take notice of them. You are 
not cognisant of their virtue. You only know that the 
hands are meant to touch and hold things, the feet to 
walk and the tongue to taste and talk. Do, nevertheless 
give the matter a thought that for instance the Allah 
has contained the eye in ten veils. It would hinder the 
sight if any of them is not there. What is the 
significance of each cover? Why the ten veils? You 
know but little. Similarly in the internal organs of body 
there are such vital functionaries like the liver, the gall 
bladder, kidneys and the spleen etc. The liver performs 
the important and difficult function that the various 
kinds of food items that reach the stomach, it treats 
them deftly and converts them into blood for the 
'seven specifics' and the rest of the system in an 
ingenious way. When blood is prepared by liver, a 
certain residue accumulates at the bottom which turns 
into bile. The gall bladder's purpose is to suck it up 
from the liver. The yellow extraneous substance that 
remains over it is called the 'Sufara'. In turn the spleen 
sucks it. The blood gushes out of the liver in a dilute 
form. Here the kidneys take up their task and separate 
the blood from water. Then it reaches the veins 
without bile content, extraneous and precipitated 
matter. If the gall bladder is affected, this extraneous 
substance enters the blood with consequent 
repercussions and disorders. If the spleen is damaged 
in any way, then the bile tends to deposit in the blood, 
creating ailments of the bile discontent. Allah forbid, if 
the kidneys are harmed, then the water tends to 
remain in the blood causing renal diseases. You see, in 
this way Allah the Merciful has allotted specific 
functions and duties to each one of these internal and 
external organs of man without which the overall 



42 

performance of the human body would suffer badly. 

Ironically, the human body is rather small to 
look a . Yet it is His master piece of creation. It is 
symbolic of and- rather a testimonial to some of His 
other products. For instance the bone is like the 

hair hke the tree, the brain like the sky, and the 
lenThy. ^ ** ^ detai,s « 

The Creator has also similarly, symbolically 
actuated in the human body the characteristic example 
of, say, the swine, the dog, the wolf, the grazing 
animal, the giant, the fairy and the angel in a singular 
manner, as aforementioned. Likewise even the 
instances of the workmanship of various kinds of 
workers are also instilled in the human body The 
capability that digests the food in the stomach is like a 
cook. The potential that converts the food into blood 
in the liver is like that of a dyer etc. Many forces of 
adroit workmanship are accordingly and constantly at 
work in your system. Ponder over them, why this 
neglect, why this stupor? Life is not a bed of roses 
Allah is doing so much for you. Why are you not 
thankful to Him? If some one sends his servant to you 
even for a day, you will feel grateful to him for it 
Allah the Merciful has assigned thousands of these 
professional workmen and craftsmen to serve you 
indefetigably, how strange that yet you are not 
thankful to Him? Do so. Remember and revere Himi 



The science of the classification and the 
characterisation of the- limbs of the human body is 



43 



called th 'Anatomy' of man. It is vast knowledge. 
People do not know It. Nor do they study it. 
Outwardly it's scholarship and study is undertaken by 
the person who aims to become a master in the 'Ilmul 
Tib' i.e. in the field of the medicine. Although its span 
and importance is generally underrated, its need is 
manifest. It has no connection with 'Deen', the faith, 
but if a man takes up its study to discover the 
evolutionary excellence of Allah, he would find three 
vital things. 

(i) That there is no flaw in the human frame and in 
what it contains. 

(ii) The 'Marafat' of Allah, the Creator is reflected 
in the minutest deal in it. 

(iii) That He has planned and programmed things 
most excellently in it. 

Beyond doubt He knows everything. He can do 
what He wills. From a drop of water He can create a 
body. He encompasses all. Thus, He, Who has the 
power and the prowess to do so, has the 
unquestionable capability and the wherewithal to 
resuscitate and bring back the dead back to life! 

His ingenuity and acumen to do anything is 
mercifully directed towards man, His masterpiece. To 
quote some examples of the human organogram, the 
liver, the heart and the brain were needed by man and 
He gave these to him. He has also provisioned things 
which were not essential as such but beautified and 
ornamented the human form, as is evident in the 
blackness of the hair, the rosiness of human lips, the 
uniform mark of the eyebrows. All this has been done 



44 



in the best interests of the man. This benefaction, mind 
you, is not restricted to the man only but extends to all 
humanity i.e. for instance whatever was required for 
the honey bee and the honey comb was provided 
Beautiful colours have been imparted to the faces and 
forms In pondering over them is the key to the 
Marafat of Allah the Merciful, the Master Creater and 
the Omnipotent. 



The doctor needs to know so much about his 
subject. The poet also should be well versed in the 
different forms of poetical presentation. The man 
should therefore not remain restricted to the pedestrian 
scope only. He should realise that in his vocation in 
h.s learning is the 'Marafat of Allah'. This is what « 1m' 
means. Nevertheless the «IIm\ the knowledge in LtfTs 
narrower and smaller than the heart. The heart is the 

the horsl ^ 3nd n6t the rider for 

Understand that nothing is nearer to you than 
your own self but you fail to do so. The person who 
does not know his own self and claims to know others, 
is Ike that pauper who can not feed himself but 
professes to have the poor and the destitute of the city 
at his dining table. Such a claim is strapge and silly. 

rea li« 1^ PUrP0Se ° f thlS diSC0Urse is that °™ should 
h a « h J b ° W /? t 1 and P rivi,e 9*d one's heart is. Allah 
has browed this boon on you but kept it hidden from 
you If you do not explore it, waste it remain 

lam r/ ° f W °f ^ 3 ^ ° f ^.^and 
lament for you. It is therefore incumbent upon you to 



45 



exert hard to acquire the truth — the virtue of this 
prize. Rather than lose its quest in the common place 
persuits of this world, seek it's culmination so that you 
may be regarded and respected in this world and in 
the hereafter. That is, Allah may grant you such status 
and stability that; there may not be any instability after 
it, that you may get such strength that there may not 
be any weakness after it, that you may be consecrated 
with such 'Marafat' that the proximity of 'His Jamal' 
may be your enviable fate. Summum bonum you may 
be blessed with such bliss that there should be nothing 
to retard it. The veritable status that you may achieve 
as such depends on your performance and the 
capability you may be able to acquire to deserve it. 

This is very essential. Otherwise, if you analyse 
matters you will see that there is no greater misery 
than to be in the humility of heat, cold, hunger, thirst, 
sickness and distress. The things one enjoys doing may 
at times be harmful to him. Those things that he thinks 
may be beneficial to him may be fraught with cares, 
stress and strain. So, one has to tread with care. 

A venerated person, we know, is a man of 
honour, due to his 'Ilm', the 'Qudrat', his 
accomplishments, the strong will, the grit and the good 
profile. At the same time as far as a person's 'Ilm', 
learning or education is concerned, if we cast a 
meditative eye on it, we will find that he is the most 
ignorant of all i.e. if even one vein in his brain is 
distorted there is a danger of his going mad or even 
that of his death. He does not know its cause or 
treatment. What is more, the medicine for its treatment 
may be lying right before his eyes but he may not be 



46 



aware that this very medicine is the cure of his malady. 
As regards his power, he is so helpless that sometimes 
he can not even kill a fly. For that matter, if a lion 

\ A, !f " t0 d ° S0 ' he * ki,,ed b * *■ H a Ip 
sHngs h.m he becomes restless. Similarly he loses his 
grip, becomes much worried and exercised over it if 

loTh* kT' ^ Part ° f Si,VCr) te Iost ' So does'he 
ose his balance if he has to go without'a morsel of 

than him Speaking about his handsomeness and 
beauty of his general demeanor, it can be compared to 
he over-extension of a leather tent on a pile of mud 

bafhtrV k " OWn ,! aCt that if a P erson do <* not take a 

nfnn 7u ^ ^ ^ **« be av <>ided by 

people and be generally disgraced in public, in addition 
lm ^ ^ f° mp,ications ** ™V set in. There b 

him all the time which he carries with him and washes 
it many times a day. 

H»„ ^lk^u 6 ' o <Hikayat ' haS been ^ uoted Art one 
day Shaikh Abu Saeed (Rahmatullah Alaih) a highly 
respected saint, was going some where in the company 

the T* TheV reaCh6d a Placc and "t 

the people there were doing the job of cleaning the 

human excreta. The path was tared with stinking dirt 

Every one was taken aback at the sight of the 

nuisance muffed their noses and ran aside helter 

laid «uT Sh6lkh ~ d ***** ^ere -J 
said Listen oh people! Do you know what this pile of 
filth is saying to me?" They enquired. "What?" He 
replied that "it is saying that till yesterday I was in the 
bazaar in the form of the fruit and the sweets etc 
People were spending money lavishly on me. i 



47 



remained the night in their bellies. Then I turned in to 
this abnoxious smelling rot. Should I run away from 
you, or you from me?" 

The fact is that man is weak, imperfect and 
helpless in this world. He would nevertheless be in full 
swing on the Day of the Judgement. Under the 
circumstances, if he retains the 'Kimya-e-Sa'adat', the 
'Elixir of life of blessings' with him, he would get out of 
the status of the animals and reach the stature of the 
angels. But if he becomes a prey to the world and the 
worldly desires, the dogs and the swines would be 
better than him, beceause they would be dissipated but 
the man would remain submerged in 'Azab' (the 
sufferings due to the retribution of his deeds) . It means 
that if the man has recognised the altitude of his status, 
he must simultaneously remember the damage, the 
loss that is likely to accrue to him, if he fails to live up 
to it. To do such a stock taking of things is the key to 
the 'Marafat' of Allah. All this should be sufficient for 
him do recognise his self. 



THE MARAFAT OF ALLAH 



Dear friend, It is stated in the Books ordained 
on the former prophets that Allah has decreed that:- 

- ijJJj Li ju siL^L; Li Jt-\ 

"Recognise your ownself, to know your 
Lord." 

Also this dictum is very well-known since the 
times and treatises of the Hadith and the 'Sahaba-e- 
Karam', The Associates of the Holy Prophet (peace 
and the blessings of Allah be upon him) 

' ^ - • ' - • < - \' , . „ „ , „ 

"He, who has recognised his ownself so 
certainly be recognised his Lord." 

The heart of the man is like a mirror. He, who 
focuses his sight and attention on it, will become 
cognisant of Allah. The point is, that there are people 
who keep on admiring themselves futilely without 
looking into this looking glass hence they get no where 
near getting to know the Almighty. Again, the answer 
lies in seeing this mirror of the heart which possesses 
the 'Marafat' of Allah in it right consonance. Hence, to 

48 



49 



know 'the real fact' about the heart in the right 
perspective is necessary of the two conspicuous aspects 
of it. One is very difficult to understand because it is 
beyond the comprehension of the people. Therefore, it 
would be in fitness of things to not to broach it. The 
other aspect is, that one should try to gain an 
understanding of the Almighty Allah by one's own self 
i.e. through the special characteristics dwelling in him 
to this effect. That is, he should try and delve into the 
study of that Supreme Lord's bounties and beauties of 
production spread in the entire universe vis a vis what 
He has kindly granted to the heart of the man in the 
kingdom of his body and in it's organs. He must 
contemplate fully on his origin to begin with, 'that he 
was a more nonentity at -first and that he is now a 
•being'. It is proclaimed in the Holy Book that:- 

(T<^ : yuJl) \^.\>L*~> 

Has there come on Man a while of time 
when he was not a thing to be 
remembered? We created Man from a 
mingled sperm-drop; then, trying him, We 
made him hearing and seeing. (76 : 1,2) 

He would realise his humble origin that he was 
a mere drop of impure water which did not contain the 
qualities that were later endowed to him viz those of 
ration, hearing, seeing, taste, touch and that of talking. 
Nor did it contain the ears, eyes, the tongue, the 
hands and feet, the head, the veins, the tissues, the 
bones or the spine etc. In short, his genetic being 



50 



consisted of this whitish drop of water only, in its 
nascent form. 

His meditations on these lines will further tell 
him that despite man's obvious climax to such lofty 
heights, he did not come into being of his own accord 
and of his own evolution. He did not produce himself. 
He was created by some one else. In his own forte he 
can not even fabricate a single, solitary hair. He is so 
helpless! What, after all was he in his very essence, 
nothing but a drop of unclean water. So, how can the 
quality of creating himself be ascribed to him? It goes 
without saying that such an introspection will give him 
an enlightenment into the factotum of his evolution, of 
his Creator. Leave aside the elegant splendeur of His 
creations in the universe; when he will look, into the 
superb organism of his body, its various functions each 
having it's exquisite expertise, he would come to 
realise the magnifictence and unparalelled adroitness of 
the Master Creator, the Allah. 

He has to thank' the Lord for many things. The 
Allah has also gifted him with an pre-eminent soul and 
a handsome body. His beautiful profile alone should 
make him bow before Him in profound gratitude. He 
is thus fortunate to have been given both the 'Jamal' 
and 'Kamal' the beauty and the bounty, by Allah. After 
all, what is he otherwise, nothing but a handful of dust! 

Allah has created nothing without purpose. 
Every part of the man's anatomy is essential, has a 
special duty to perform in the manner prescribed. Each 
one of these components has been expertly produced, 
planned and programmed. Nothing is missing or 
wanting. Nothing is misplaced. So perfect is the entire 



51 



organogram that it can not be excelled in any way. For 
instance, look at the teeth in man's jaw. The front ones 
are pointed and sharp to help him cut and pierce the 
eatables adequately. The others near them are rather 
wide, groovy and plattered to enable him to grind 
them into fine disgestable particles. The lower portion 
under the tongue moistens the morsel so formed, 
making it more malleable for easy and safe passage 
through the throat. How gorgeous! In the same way 
the man's palm has five fingers. Four fingers are 
similar. But the thumb is placed at some distance from 
them. It is shorter and a little thicker than them. It has 
the faculty of coordinating and working together with 
each one of them and also of working together with all 
the fingers collectively, for good grasp and handling. In 
turn, each finger has three pores, but the thumb has 
two. The man can move and twist these pores at will. 
By bending them single handedly man can cup his 
palm. By uniting and twisting the pores of both the 
hands he can use them as a hollow plate. Likewise, by 
closing these pores and the palm of the hand he can 
convert it into a sort of boxing glove, to fight his 
enemy. On the other hand, he can utilise it as a platter 
with straight palms. Any debate, therefore/ about <he 
position, size or the quantum of these fingers would 1>e 
an exercise in futility. So superbly have they been 
made! The Supreme Architect of all these things and 
the universe is the Best Judge. He knows all about 
every thing He has evolved. 

Man's needs and wants are unlimited. The 
Creator's creations are also unlimited. Man needs 
clothes to wear, a house to live in and scores of other 
things.. The natural elements like the rain, air, heat, 



52 



cold and land to grow his food in have likewise been 
produced for him. The essential metals like tin, iron, 
bronze etc have also similarly been provisioned to man 
to assist him to make his tools and implements for 
different purposes and industries. All these things and 
many others are there for him for the taking, to benefit 
from them, to lead a comfortable life. Should man 
then not become curious enough to ultimately feel the 
presence of the Omnipotence of Him, who in His 
supreme kindness has done all this for him? Should 
man's heart not be enriched with His love and in His 
worship? According to the 'Hadith-e-Qudsi' (Hadith of 
the Qudsi source) the Holy Prophet (peace and the 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has stated that:- 

"My Mercy has excelled upon My Wrath." 

According to the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessing of Allah be upon him), the 'Rehmat' the 
kindness of Allah on His people is far far more than 
that of a doting mother on her suckling baby." 

On a comparatively lower scale a simple but a 
good man sees the 'Marafat' of Allah in such things. 

(i) In his own creation from the humble origin of a 
drop of water. 

(ii) In the uncanny traits of the organs of his body. 

(iii) In the provisioning by Allah of all his wants and 
needs, 

(iv) In the beauty of his demeanor. The aesthetic 
things created by the God in him which give 



53 



him an appealing and adorable appearance. 
Allah likes such a person and blesses him with 
His 'Marafat'. Such an evaluation of his self 
becomes a key to Allah's 'Marafat'. 

The man strives to understand the thing he 
does not know. He tries his best to understand Allah 
by the internal and the external qualities he possesses. 
Whereas his effort is laudable, the fact remains that the 
man's comprehension and capability is t limited, no 
matter how exalted his status may be. His unabated 
research in this connection will no doubt enhance his 
pedestal in life; the more and more refined his heart 
and 'Nafs' become immersed in the process, by. his 
great love for Him, he will consequently attain relative 
nearness to Him but he will ultimately fathom the tf uth 
that only 'Allah knows the Allah in toto' and that He 
can not be encompassed. 

For example the 'Dil', the heart of man, his 
'Nafs' can in reality not be quantified. It has no 
dimensions. It is indivisible. It has no colour. In short, 
it is above all such considerations. How can one, in 
such a case, determine the shape of such a thing? 
How can one visualise such a thing whose form or 
bearings are not known? Therefore it does not tally 
with any quality in man which may correspondingly 
discern it. * 

There are many things in man which he feels 
but he can not understand them. Love and pain, can, 
for example can be felt but they can not be seen or 
conjured up in mind nor do they have any shape, 
colour or size. 



54 



The matter is rather complex. Different 
discernments and conditions felt by man pertain to 
different constituents of his senses. For instance, we 
know that the voice is akin to the ear. The colour is 
seen and appreciated by the eyes. The tongue 
recognises the taste and the nose smells the odour. 
The redeeming common factor, the ration may have 
something to do with it. A book of inductive logic may 
according, perhaps be pertinent to the issue to an 
extent but surely not to the heart and its special 
endowment which is a subject in a .different class 
altogether. 

The Allah is every where. But his presence 
cannot be circumscribed to a particular place, to the 
exclusion of the rest. His presence and command is felt 
every where. 

The 'Jan', the 'Soul' cannot be felt singly in 
relationship to any organ of the body. It cannot be said 
that it is in the hands, iathe feet, in the head or in any 
other part of the body . These organs of the body are 
divisible as aforementioned but 'Dil', 'Jan* or 'Rooh' is 
not divisible. Logically a thing that is indivisible cannot 
be contained in any thing that is divisible, per force 
majeure. 

By saying, however, that the heart 'Dil, 'Jan' 
and 'Rooh' bear no relationship to any organ of the 
body, it does not mean that it does not have an impact 
on them. As a matter of fact, all parts of the body are 
subservient to it and under the direct control of the 
'Dil*, the heart, the 'Rooh', the soul or the 'Nafs' of 
man. Susmnurn- bonuno, th*'Rboh' of man is the King 
in this context in so much as the entire universe is 



55 

under the direct control of Almighty Allah, the King of 
the universe. 

The subject of 'Rooh' is very delicate and subtle. 
Despite all deliberations and discourses on it. It Is * 
unique and well guarded secret. Hence it can not be 
broached beyond a certain limit. For instance:- 

"Verily, Allah created Adam in whatever 
form He will." 

This is where one has no other alternative but to 
say that Allah knows best. 

We have hitherto determined that:- 

(i) Allah is Omnipotent. % The beneficience of His 
'Ausaf-e-Hasana' i.e. great qualities of supreme 
excellence are manifest in Him. 

(ii) He is Omnipresent but His presence cannot be 
considered restricted to any one place to the 
exclusion of. any other place or places. 

(Hi) That^ 'Marafat' of 'Nafs' is the key to His 
'Marafat'. 

(iv) The optimum aim of man is to attain His 
'Marafat'. 

Now, one would like to understand as to how. 
He is the Supreme Ruler, the King Supreme in the 
kingdom of man? There are many enigmas to be 
unravelled :- 

A. His giving commands to the angels. Their 



56 

humble obedience. 

B. His ordinations from the Heaven above and 
their supplicant compliance of earth, below. 

C. The continual motion of the stars and 
constellations. 

D. The grant of the 'Rizq' to his living creatures for 
their substenance by Him (from the skies 
above). 

These are cogent questions. Hitherto we have 
dealt with His 'Marafat'. These matters and the like 
come under the purview of what is called the kind 
Acts of His Benificience'. 

In this thesis we have determined many courses 
that lead to His 'Marafat'. Now, we would like to know 
of the 'Marafat' of His 'Afaal' i.e. the 'Marafat' of His 
kind acts. In other words unless you come to know of 
the way man rules the kingdom of his body, you 
would not be able to understand how He, the Master 
of all masters reigns Supreme over the entire universe 
Hence again, we come to the inevitable conclusion that 
unless the man gets to know his 'self and each act of 
his is guided in this perspective, he will not be able to 
resolve the mystery. 

For example, when you intend to write down 
Bismillah' (By the name of the Allah) on a piece of 
paper, your heart desires to do so first, then the heart 
(the real heart, not the one on the left side of your 
body) stirs to this effect and orders the brain to have it 
implemented. The first sensitive chamber of the brain 
which is the place of the human 'Khayai' i e the 
conjuring up of the thought of it, does it. The concept 



57 



of the thought is conceived. It is imparted by the brain 
to the muscles of the brain which spread and extend it 
to the body; the writing fingers get directed, the veins 
and its tissues receive the message to this effect, in turn 
they hold the pen and inscribe the words according to 
the stimuli received. The other sensory organs also aid 
and abet and 'Bismillah' is written. Hence, it is possible 
to infer that the entire transaction took place on 
account of the basic 'will' to do so. In the same 
manner, in the inception or the beginning of every 
thing this 'Will' or the 'Irada' is of the essence. When it 
is attributed to Allah, this 'Will' of His is called the 
'Irada-e-Bari' viz the 'Paramount Will' of Allah! 

In so much as man's will or 'Iradat' first 
emanates in his heart and there onwards it reaches 
other quarters, likewise the 'Irada-e-Bari' the Allah s 
Will's influence first starts from the 'Arsh' the heaven 
above, then it reaches other positions and people. 
Furthermore the ingenious manner in which this 
concept of the will reaches the man's brain via the 
delicately fine fibres of man's heart, his 'Rooh; 
likewise, this involvable gem of Allah's 'Will, His 
'Iradah' is conveyed by Him from the 'Arsh' to the 
'Kursi', the Heavehly seat of Super Excellence. This 
gem par excellence is manifest in His Angel or 'Roohul 
Quds' (the great 'Rooh'). Same as the domain of the 
brain is subservient to the heart of the man, similarly 
the impact of the Allah's orders is conveyed to the 
'Kursi' viz the subservient realm of His ordainment, for 
immediate obedience. The entire process described in 
the previous chapter, from its advent of the thought of 
writing 'Bismillah' in the heart, to its final execution, is 
likewise initiated by the 'Jauhar-e-Talif the 'Uncanny 



58 



Volition of Allah', in a majestic way, which actuates 
the stars and other constellations in the galaxy 
assigning them their desired roles. Consequently by 
their radiation, based on their intrinsic potential, the 
atmosphere is stirred to create weather conditions like 
the heat the cold and the autumnal season etc. 

Also as the pen sets the ink in motion to 
assimilate arid foregather scattered words to give it the 
united form of 'Bismillah'; in the same way the heat, 
cold, water and dust set their compounds in 
movement to gather valid forms constituted by their 
interaction to give matter their various shapes, the heat 
and dust to amalgamate them and the dryness to 
cohere them. 

When the pen moves to write, whatever is 
conceived to be written, it's vision is formulated, which 
ultimately takes shape in the words that are penned 
down. In the same way when the inherent values of 
the above mentioned compounds are set in motion, 
thereafter through the agency of the angels the forms 
of the animals and other vegetation are visualised in 
accordance with the transcripts of the above referred to 
'Loh-e-Mahfooz'. In view of the loftiness of 'Arsh', the 
'Loh-e-Mahfooz' and the 'Kursi' many people think 
since times immemorial that Allah resides in heaven at 
•Arsh'! In 'Soora-e-Younus' in the Holy Book, it is 
stated that:- 

Then took over the Throne, managing the 
Affair.... (10:3) 

Talking of those endowed with 'Kashf one can 



59 

say that their word has it's value. 

"Verily, Allah created Adam according to 
His fashion." 

Beware then that as the saying is, 'only a king 
knows the real worth of a king'. If you yourself *ere 
not a king in your own domain and if the Allah had 
not blessed you with a semblance of His mercy in you 
you would never have got any where near to His 
'Marafat'. Hence thank that Almighty King who has 
created you and crowned you with the kingship of 
your realm. 

Your 'Arsh' is animal 'Rooh'. It's source is in the 
heart. Your 'Israfil' (The angel of the Day o 
Judgement) has been made by Allah of it. Your Kursi 
has been constructed likewise of the thesaurus of 
thought. Eyes, ears etc and the 'Hawas', the sensory 
elements are like the angels. The brain is hke a 
conopy. It's dome which has been made of your 
perceptive constituents is your sky. After cleammg 
away all base concepts from your heart it has been 
installed as the reigning king of all parts of your body. 
After having done so much for you, you were told to 
never even for a moment reglect yourself or your 
kingdom. Otherwise this neglect, is tantamount to the 
ignoring of the orders of Allah that will result in the 
serious jeopardy of your position before Him. 

'ouJ; u ^ 'J >ii *6> > p'^T '&\ bji 
"Then Verily, Allah created Adam 



60 



o^l to H ^ , fashion ' 50 know th ^" 

U man, thou will know thy Lord." 

The concept of the kingdom of the man 
denved ,„ mlnlturisatlon from ' * ™" * 

Kmgship and Kingdom over the entire unVverS ,„ 
Itself, this notion contains the emphasis on:- 

The llm- or knowledge of man's own 'Nats' vis 
a v,s the learning of the vital qualltVef 2 
vocations of the different organs of his body 
which contstltute his kingdom V 

(») The 'llm' of the 'Marafaf of Allah, His Kingdom 
vis a vis AUah's Beneficlen, attention toward, 

"ach oth ' VT ** an3eb ' s «*ton*Tfc 
each other and the exalted 'Arsh' th„ «w , 

and the 'Kursi' which 1.1^,^ J?~ 
knowledge of great merit. Q 

Obviously, an astute person will never remain 

fooi^o w,ll only reap the harvest of h* 

Some of the 'Naturalists' and the 'Astronomers' 

heir l mited education of the subject that as such they 
tend to culminate the eventual effect, the result of 
everything in the effects of the stars. Their fancy is so 
dogmatic, so pedestrian that in terms of this illusion 
their state can be compared to that of an ant crawling 
on a piece of paper which may give the impression 
that it s creating a black trace on it surface, as it is 
going along listlessly. The naturalists extend their fancy 
even further by simultaneously making believe that the 



61 



ant is also creating decorative marks on the paper, to 
boot. 

The obvious fallacy lies in their creed carried too 
far that all human beings are irrevocably influenced by 
the stars irrespective of all other facts. The antonym of 
fact is fancy or farce. Then astrologers easily forget that 
these stars too are in obedience to the angels, as 
ordained by the Allah, the Supreme Master of the skies 
and the stars and of all that is in this universe. Their 
grasp is limited to the material things only. They are 
complete novices in the spiritual field which is superior 
to all physical worldly considerations. The stars of 
Alam-e-Jismani' have less brilliance than the 
resplendent limelight of the 'Alam-e-Roohani'. They 
know not that the 'Rooh' rules over the body. It's 
reverse is not true. They are proud of their 'know how' 
and knowledge but in their profanity they remain 
devoid of the blessings of th<? path of the spiritual 
galaxy of the 'Rooh' where many a luminous star of 
vivid the 'Batin' marks a milestone in the course of 
Allah and the 'Meraj' (The glory of the ascending 
heights to the path of Allah, as bestowed on the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon Him). 
He has accordingly proclaimed in the Holy Book. 

.... ^yjt j 'M\ '^X> 

And thus we show Abraham the kingdom 
of the heavens and the earth. . . . (6 : 75) 

The Prophet Abraham (peace of Allah be upon 

him) exclaimed in reply. 



62 



.... >jOlj Joi ^ 'J 

(V^ : ? UW) 

I turn my face to Him who originated the 
heavens and the earth.... (6 : 79) 

The Holy Prophet (peace and the blessings of 
Allah be upon him) has also said 

"Verily, there are seventy thousand 
curtains of pure light for Allah. If He had 
unveiled it, the rays of His Countenance 
would have burnt every one who looked 
towards Him." 

People of the 'Ilm-ul-Tib' (the learning or 
education of the (medicine) have likewise based much 
of their practice similarly on the hot or cold effect of 
things. It has assisted them to an extent in the 
prosecution of their profession. 

The redeeming quality of the Creator in making 
the sun bright and hot, the Saturn dry and cold and 
Mercury even more hot is not without it's purpose. The 
poor astrologer, in his astronomical clairvoyance could, 
however not phathom the ingenuity of their Creator in 
positioning the sun nearest to the earth, or the variations 
of the day and night or for that matter the humble 
obedience in duty of all stars and constellations in the 
sky to His Supreme Will. He has omitted to give 
credence to their spiritual virtue vis-a-vis their physical 



63 



existence and believed properties. Only if he knew that 
all these stars in the hemisphere are subjugated and 
subservient to the will and command of Allah. He would 
then not have believed so much in their physical aspect, 
blindly. 

The sun and the moon are to a reckoning. 

(55 : 5) 

And the sun, the moon and the stars are 
subjected to His command.... (7 : 54) 
"That thing is considered subjugated which is 

harnessed and put under control and made to work. 

Like the human organs do for man. Each one of them 

have been assigned." 

The stars too are servants of Allah, fulfilling his 
commands. In the same manner as the brain directs 
the other organs of the human body to act in 
conjugation with the discerning faculties endowed by 
Him to man. The stars also remain occupied in their 
stipulated performance through the angels assigned by 
the Allah to this effect, performing the role of their 
directors and prime-movers. In fact these angels are 
the living heralders of many a thing in their stipulated 
spheres. 

The ostensible cause and its effect i.e. the result 
matters only so much. The unqualified coincidences 



64 



are all there to make people believe in things to the 
extent that their position can be compared to the 
legendary blind man who groped about the figure of 
an elephant part by part and rather than think of the 
whole gave each one of them a different name based 
on erroneous judgement. The same applies to this 
Nujoomi, the clairovoyant who similarly falaciously 
considers a slave a master, the king. This very thing is 
lucidly depicted in 'Soora-e-In'aam' in the Holy Book. 

'I do not love the setters.' (6 : 76) 

"The moon and the sun are conjectured to 
be the Allah by the ignorant. The commanded are 
called the commanders till the sanity prevails," 

There are twelve 'Burroj' i.e. mounts in the 
celestial sphere (The 'Arsh'). It can be compared to a 
lofty king sitting within his glorious chamber de grace 
with his 'Wazir'. Around him, in vantage-ground are 
sitting the elite assistants of the 'Wazir' in twelve 
distmguished heavens of peace, each having a door 
Seven obedient but agile horsemen are hovering 
around each door at the beck and call of the assistants 
of the Wazir' listening carefully to the summons 
received. For their immediate implementation there are 
four footmen standing at some little distance from 
these horsemen, ready with their 'Kummands' ie 

fSSZ, tf/f ^ watchi "9 ^ese horsemen thus 
fulfilling the instructions received by roping a certain 
group of people in and producing them before the 
high command'. Then they are either punished or 
rewarded. 



65 



Accordingly the 'Arsh' is the abode of distinction 
of the distinguished Minister in charge of affairs i.e. the 
favourite angel in the high heaven. This is in 
contradistinction to the mounts in the hemisphere of 
the stars as envisaged by an astrologer or an 
astromoner. These clairvoyants assign different 
meanings to the different positions of the pawns and 
the paraphernalia on the chess board of the sky in the 
same manner as a Tabib' or a physician deciphers the 
different ailments by different symptoms. 

That is their total attainment of 
knowledge.... (53 : 30) 

However when Allah's mercy overtakes such a 
sick person, the above mentioned attendents attend to 
him, as stated and he is saved. The path of a prophet 
is star-studded in the same fashion and the 'Valf too 
performs miracles, in his cure. 

"Verily, trial is put to the Prophets, then to 
the Protecting Friends then the similars 
and the likes. So when I am indisposed. 
Do not ask for my health." 

We also see some people who look very sick 
but are not sick. Actually they are the people who 
have been reduced to such a state due to tHe love of 
Allah, whom they adore so much that they look ill. 
Indeed love is so self consuming! 



66 



Now you should understand the meanings of 
the terms 'Subhan Allah' (Allah be praised), 'Alhamdu 
U Hah' (with the BeneJicence of Allah), *La llah-ha- 
Illullah' (There is no Allah but the Allah Himself) and. 
•Allah ho Akbar' (Allah is Great) because they are 
inseparable conjuncts of the 'Marafat' of Allah. 

In derivation, when you come to recognise 
yourself i.e. in the piety and virtue in you, you get to 
know the supreme piety and virtuousness par 
excellence of Allah and thereby understand 'Subhan 
Allah'. When you become cognizant of the Kingship of 
Allah by dint of being the king of your own domain 
and assimilate the truth of the grand Supremacy of 
Allah on the universe sine* everything is subservient to 
Him. Only then you can consider that you have come 
to understand the meaning of 'Alhamdo Lilian'. Verily, 
all Praise and thanks - giving is due to Him and Him 
only. 

Now, last but not the least, you have to 
understand what the meaning of 'Allah o Akbar' is. It 
does not simply mean 'Allah is Great*. It means far far 
more than that. It does not just mean that He is 
greater than others. He is the Greatest of all. Yet, no 
comparison can be drawn between Him and anybody 
else, at all. He is above and beyond all 
comprehension. He is Infinitely Supreme. He surpasses 
and encompasses everything. He is Omnipotent, 
Omniscient, Omnipresent and the Most Beneficient! 
We come to know of Him and His many unique and 
splendid qualities and powers from His creative genius 
and His Holy Names. So great and without paralled is 
He that we can not possibly ever be able to describe 
him or enumerate His Blessings. 



67 



God forbid, the piety of Allah is not like the 

piety of man. It just can not be. It is we, who can not 
find words to, in the least describe His great attributes, 
and in doing so ascribe words or exspressions to Him 
which are just not adequate since He is the Creator of 
all His 'Makhlooq (i.e. of what He has created). So 
how can they be like them. In the same way, Allah 
forgives us, when we draw a comparison between the 
kingdom of man over which he rules and the Kingdom 
of Allah over which His Reign is manifest, we do not 
mean that they are similar. It just shows how inapt we 
are. How helpless man is and how Glorious is Allah! 
For instance if a child asks us about the charm of ruling 
over a state and to make him understand we reply that 
the same as you find in playing with your bat and ball, 
you can appreciate how near or far we are from the 
truth. We have said so before and we reiterate that 
only Allah knows Allah in toto and no one else. The 
best course to adopt for man under the circumstances 
is to:- 

(i) Get absorbed in the search of His 'Marafat' to 
the best of his capability. 

(ii) To concentrate on His beneficience and look for 
His 'Noor\ His 'Jamal', His 'Qudrat' in His 
qualities and creations. 

(Hi) To be thankful to Him for His kindness 

(iv) To worship him with every fibre of heart and 
soul. 

(v) To obey His commandments. 

We have all come from Him and to Him shall we 
return. 



68 



"To him is our Return and the Last 
Resort." 

The more you love Him, revere him, worship 
Him the more you will be blessed. He likes those who 
are sincere, devoted, humble, loving and grateful. 
Such noble conduct is sure to be rewarded. 

"I am your necessary inevitability so hold 
finely your inevitability." 

His 'Zikr', His remembrance from the core of 
the heart can. only be fortified by detaching all desires 
from one's soul, giving up vile deeds and by getting 
fully submerged in His worship. A sincere heart is 
peaceful and clean. The grandeur of a 'Momin' lies in 
it. 

( V : J'y*}j\ 'jJfit U 

The Believers have succeeded. (23 : 1) 
Allah has also specified that:- 

Surely successful is he who purifies 
himsdlf, and mentions the Name of his 
Lord, and prays. (87 : 14,15) 

One has to lead a life in this world. Hence, it 
can be said that man can not possibly be praying all 
the time. The broad term 'Khawhish' or desire is also 
relevant, in so much that one can not forego every 



69 



desire. If one does not eat, he will die. Man can also 
not refrain from marital conjugation or else the human 
race will cease to flourish. Thence forth the 'Shariat' 
the code of the Faith is the best guide for man. The 
base wishes, greed and other petty, mundane, vile, 
churlish desires should be discarded. Those who break 
the barriers set forth by the 'Shariat' meet their own 
doom. 

( > : J'rtiaJl) 3, iljjj j»& JLfii 'ijJ^ 

He who trespasses Allah's bounds, does 
wrong to himself.... (65 : 1) 

Seven principal causes have been enumerated 
about those who declare 'Mubah' to be 'Ghair Mubah' 
i.e. the invalid is considered valid and permissible by 
them. 

(i) There is a school of thought prevalent which 
does not believe in Allah. Ostensibly it tries to 
look for Him but when .it does not find or 
•recognise Him, it gives the search up. Their 
believers start pinning their faith in the stars and 
the like and consider the man's creation by what 
they term as a natural phenomenon etc. Their 
theories and superstitions are self created. It is 
like a person who writes a good letter then 
makes believe and says that it got self created. 
How can that be? How can its authors '11m', 
intent and 'Qudrat', competence be ignored? 

(ii) The second cause is the 'Jahalat' or stupidity of 
these people . If one were to follow them, one 
would be made to think that this world 
happened to come in to being some .how. And 
that it is what it is. That there is nothing after it. 



70 



As if all life is without a purpose. 
If these people were to look within their self and 
concentrate, they would perhaps come nearer 
the truth. The man has both, body and the 
soul. The body may perish but the soul never 
dies. There is an accountability of deeds done in 
this world. There is a hereafter. 
Then there are those who profess to believe in 
Allah but do not know the meaning of 'Shariat'. 
In their inverse reasoning they say 'what need 
has Allah of our 'Ibadat', of our worship? How, 
(Allah forbid) do our vices affect Him as He is 
above them, immune to them all, since He is 
the Lord, He is the King? According to them 
the good, the Ibadat' and the evil deeds are all 
at par and valueless. They do not ponder over 
the Qur'an. It sayst- 

a : >U) i *J& vjr£ cJji jrj 

And whoso purifies himself, purifies 
himself for his on sake.... (35 : 18) 

(1 : Oj£ai») j. JUbUtu' Cjtl oiGr 'J*'j 
And whoso struggles, he struggles only for 



Whoso acts right, it is fof himself.... 

(41 : 46) 

The follower of these misguided people, this 
wretch does not realise that the 'Shariat' is the 
code of conduct of the Faith 'Shariat' is thus to 
be followed as per approved behaviour, for the 



himself.... 



(29 : 6) 



.....jJLliuJU^'ji 



71 



Allah and not for his own self. Such a person is 
so fantastic that if he is sick, he will not follow 
the 'preventions' prescribed by the physician 
and wantonly does those things specifically 
prevented by the doctor, in his interest. He 
would insist on doing what the doctor has 
particularly forbidden. Such a diabetic patient 

would eat sweet things and say 'Why should I 
follow physician? What does he stand to lose if I 

do not follow him and take sweet things? 

Surely, the Tabib', the doctor is not the person 

who will suffer. It is the patient who would die. 

The 'prevention' of bad deeds purifies the soul. 

( A* : »T yCili) Of£»*A & J* 'J* $ 

Except for him who comes to Allah with a 
sincere heart. (26 : 89) 

In their ignorance arid stupidity they also 
advance the argument that the 'Shariyat' 
stipulates that the desire, anger and deception 
etc. should be eliminated from the heart which is 
not possible. They misunderstand and 
misconstrue things. The 'Shariyat' has not 
forbidden these things as such but has laid 
stress on disciplining them, in curbing them 
lest these traits should get out of control, 
beyond civilised rational behaviour. The evil 
begets evil. It's harmful effect would be felt by the 
evil doer! The major vices in man will take him 
straight to Hell. If the sense of decency be 
predominant in man, Allah the Merciful might 
forgive his minor vices. Let us assert what is 



72 



good and ban what is bad. They Holy Prophet 
(peace and the blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has said: 

"I also feel angry like other human beings, 
sometimes." 

And Allah has ordained : - 
Ort:0>J() .../Ji^tVj^ij 
And restrain rage.... (3 : 134) 

Allah has praised the man who tries to control his 

anger. 

(v) The fifth speciality of these misguided people is 
that they state that 'Allah is 'Rahim o Karim', 
Merciful and Forgiver of Sins. He will forgive 
us", although they should also remember that 
whereas He is Merciful, He is also 'Shadidul 
Iqab' i.e. He also punishes severely. They do 
not take into consideration that many of His 
'Makhlooq', i.e. many people suffer from 
ailments, hunger and various dire predicaments 
due to their own follies. They do not see that 
unless people work for their living, whether in 
trade or in agriculture, they will live' from hand 
to mouth. 

Such fallacious thinking is like living in a fool's 
paradise. Indeed, Allah is 'Khairur Raziqeen', 
The Best Provider of 'Rizq', the subsistenance 
but man must try to earn his living. 



73 



( 1 : a j») .... 4S'j j *iJi J* ill » ^ jjTa "j? U j 

No creature is there in the earth, but its 
provision is upon Allah. . . . (11:6) 

The effort to work for his living for man is the 
same as one's endeavour to do good for the 
good of the hereafter. 

(T \ : Ju- U J) JuiUl blj 

That a man shall have only what he strives 
for. (53 : 39) 

They befool only themselves by such 
superfluous thoughts. They talk of the 
Beneficience and the Forgiveness of Allah but 
do Satanic deeds. Such hypocrisy is untenable. 

The arrogance 1 of 'Jihalat' i.e. the stupidity of 
this sect is such that they go to the extent that 
they claim that their Deen, their Faith is strong 
as 'Qilteen' (A crystal measure whose details can 
be seen in the books of the Tiqa' i.e. in the 
religious jurisprudence) which can not be 
polluted by any vices. Their self centeredness 
and conceit is so deep and shallow that if they 
are rebutted by any one, they become his 
enemy for the life time. On the other hand they 
hanker after a morsel of food, right to the end 
of their life. 

* 

These people are not even in their infancy, in 
this regard. They have no knowledge of the 



74 



'Qikcen*. They do not have the status. They 
should refrain from living in such fanciful belief 
that they have attained that stature where 
'Gunah' or a sin can not harm them. Even if a 
person be above enmity, anger, desire and 
duplicity, still such a claim is 'Batil', totally 
baseless. Such Utopian thinking does not raise 
them above those who are humble worshippers 
of Allah, and guard their 'Nafse Saleh', clean 
soul all the time, yet living in mortal fear of 
Allah lest any act of theirs should per chance 
invoke His unhappiness. 

The right is right and the wrong is wrong. There 
never was and there is no justification to its 
contrary. The Holy Prophet (peace and the 
blessings of Allah be upon him) was a living 
example of all that was the best condevable in 
man. If, on the contrary these wretched people 
think that they are not affected in the least if 
they take wine out golden casks, they are in 
grave error and are sadly mistaken. 

The saints, the venerated in the 'Deen' know 
fully well that the first essential difference 
between man and the animal is that the man 
rises above the status of the animal by 
overcoming the desires of the evil. The 'Nafse 
Balil', the evil doing 'Batin' is very misleading, 
wily and treacherous. It provokes man to 
become vain, boastful and proud. 

Man should therefore know that if he is acting 
in conformity with 'Shariat', he is on the right 
course. Vice versa he is not. To be devilish in 



75 



deeds and a claimant of *Vilayat' is Satanic in 
design and self contradictory. 

(vii) The source of the seventh cause is more on 
account of negligence and desire of the first 
order than owing to ignorance, although it 
verges on stupidity. This happens when they get 
influenced and impressed by impostors who don 
the dress of the Soofi's try to immitate them in 
their style but like wolves in sheep's clothing 
defile everything good, follow the devil by 
giving different explanations for it, acting with a 
self-assumed licence to behave lasciviously 
without any let up or hinderance, misbehaving 
in many ways and mischief mongering in public. 
Such are these devil's disciples about whom the 
Holy Book says:- 

We have put veils on their hearts and 
heaviness in their ears, lest they 
understand it.... ( 18 : 57 > 

And further added: 

So if thou callest them to the guidance, 
even then they will not be guided ever. 

(18 : 57) 

For this reason, such people should be dealt 
with very firmly. No nuisance should be tolerated from 



76 



them. Discussion and dialogue serve no purpose with 
them. Their calling the immoral the moral and the vice 
versa does not alter the truth. They are ignorant of 
their own self, of their Creator and are unaware of the 
'Shariayat'. Whatever the case may be, their acts are 
such that they do not conform to any ethical or moral 
laws or tenets of decent and civilised conduct 
Sometimes they act naively and ask things in answer 
They are like the enigmatic persons who go to a doctor 
and say that they are sick but when the doctor 
enquires of them of what is wrong with them, they do 
not tell him the symptoms. How can he treat them if 
he is not told the symptoms of their malady? 

Let such people indulge in their wanton follies 
and remain sunk in the labyrinth of their charade 
After all they are the servants and He is the Lord and 
Master. Nothing is hidden from Him. He knows how 
best to deal with them! 



THE 'MA'RAFAT' (COGNIZANCE) 
OF THE WORLD 

Dear friend, This world is a path on which the 
man travels on his journey onwards to the next. At 
times it is compared to an oasis at the end, and foot 
hold of a vast desert of the 'Marafat'. This 'Dunya' i.e. 
this world -and the , Akharat', the next one the 
'Hereafter' are two conditions. One state pertains to 
the man's life and times, (which is so near to him) till 
before his death. The hereafter starts after his death. 
This world is for man to prepare for the 'Akhirat'. The 
purpose of this life is the collect a treasure of good 
deeds as his earnings of his sojourn here which will 
stand him in good stead in the hereafter. Although 
man has been created rather weak and incomplete in 
his genesis, he has been simultaneously blessed with 
such genius that by following the dictates oi Allah he 
may be in a position to achieve the 'Kamal' i.e. 
excellence, acquire angelic qualities and see the Glories 
of his Allah. This is the sum total of his existence. This 
is the promised 'Paradise'. 

The key to His 'Marafat' lies in man's gratitude 
for His great kindness to him and in the appreciation 
of His innumerable bounties and in the cognizance of 
picturesque beauty of His creations. Man's 'Hawas', 
(his senses of perception) make him taste and relish 
the ravishing things produced by him; see the unique 



77 



78 



splendour of immense beauty, spread all around him 
in nature. His ears make -him appreciate soothing 
sounds and music, his hands make him feel the 
warmth of loving touch etc. As long as man is alive he 
can enjoy all this and be grateful. When he dies he 
loses the freely rendered services of these intelligence 
agents which remain no more. 



Therefore the man needs two things in life. 

(i) To protect his heart from those things that kill 
his heart. He should provide its food. 

(ii) To protect his body from the damaging effects 
of those things that kill it. He should likewise 
provide it its food. 



In our discourse earlier we have established that 

A h .f 1°°! °/ 4hc heart te the ,ovc and *e 'Marafat' of 
Allah which is based on the dictum that the food of 
each thing is what it really likes and yearns to have 
based on his internal, natural characteristics to this 
effect. It must also be nourishing and sustaining. For 
that matter even the body's care is also for the sake of 
the heart. For, the body will ultimately perish but the 
heart will live. A simple example can be given in this 
regard viz the body is for the heart, as a camel is for 

« i H S l \!°, ne Wh ° Perf0rms Ha, « on *N« to the 
Holy Kaba', the House of Allah) in the path of Allah. 

He rides it and reaches the 'Khana-e-Kaaba' The 
reverse of it Is not true i.e. the «Haji\ the pilgrim is not 
for the camel but the camel is for the *Haji'. Naturally 
the «Haji* will feed the camel till it reaches the Khana-e- 
Kaaba. Any let up or delay, any neglect on his part on 
this account will be damaging to his objective 



79 

Analysing the matter further, the human body requires 
three things. 

a) Food 

b) Clothes 

c) House or Shelter. 

In other words eating requires food, draping 
needs clothes, the house is that place of sanctuary 
where it may remain sheltered from the on onslaughts 
of the heat and cold etc so that the body may remain 
^protected of the causes of his death. 

In short, these three things are the basis, the 
elementary pre-requisetes of the body i.e. of his 
physical existence. 

However, if the man overeats he may die. The 
desire of the house and the clothes has also been 
implanted in the man for his subsistence. The excessive 
demand of this nature may be harmful. 

Here, the ration, the common sense comes to 
his rescue and prevents him from over indulgence in 
these demands of the body. Summun bonum, what 
supervenes them is the heart. It's food is noble. The 
more food the heart gets, the better it is for the soul. 
With the result that a heart nourishes well, with the 
love and the quest of Allah finds it's niche and rides 
the body like a knight-rider who has the reins of its 
mount in its hand. So pay heed my friend and do not 
let its reins get loose. When you are fully in control the 
body's lust, the greed and malfeasance of the unholy 
and the misleading urges will be curbed. 



The world comprises three principal categories 



of things, viz. 



80 



Those things that are found on the earth like 
vegetation of all kinds, mines and animals etc 
The land's surface in itself forms the basis of 
human residence, agriculture etc. 
The minerals like iron, steel, bronze etc. are 
used for making implements, tools and other 
apparatus required by man for various 
purposes. 

The man rides the animals and eats their flesh, 
and maintains his existence by eating other 
articles of food also. 

There are many other complexities. It is pity 
that in his daily labour he keeps his hand and feet and 
above all his heart busy int them, as the total 
preoccupation of his heart as such can be very harmful 
ndeed It can lead to the heart's demise due to 
forgetfulness of its true purpose and in its involvement 
in worldly greed, backbiting, anger and like evil 
pursuits. 



Likewise three professions i.e. those of the 
goldsmith, weaving and that of architecture are also of 
paramount importance. These vocations are not only 
interrelated with each other in some form or the other 
but are also actively associated with their subsidiary 
trades. Like the cotton pickers, pick the cotton flowers 
ex the cotton plantations. It's casters sift the fluff the 
cotton spinners spin them into threads and ultimately 
the cotton weavers loom and weave them into 
different kinds of fabrics. These clothes are then 
stitched and tailored. The ironsmith makes the tools 



81 



with which the tailoring, stitching and sewing is 
performed. In this manner people of different 
vocations work with each other. 

Each is dependent on the other. Naturally, 
complications and professional jealousies set in. The 
tailor virtually becomes reliant on the weaver for the 
woven material and on the spinner, who spins it with 
his mechanical devices fabricated in turn by a carpenter 
or an ironsmith, while he himself also requires his own 
tools and apparatus to tailor, for which again the 
ironsmith's services are required. This complex system 
of give and take results in complications and rivalries, 
for which three principal things inter alia other factors 
which bear on the issue are vital. 

(i) Political viz tactical acumen and statesmanship. 

(ii) The 'monitoring gear' and the government. 

(Hi) 'Ilm-e-Fiqah'. The code of conduct as per the 
laid down rules and regulations, in religion. 

In final analysis, this infrastructure is for the 
realisation and the accomplishment of the aforesaid 
three pre-requisites of man viz the food, the clothing 
and the house or the place of residence of man. The 
rest follow them. These basic requirements of man 
pertain to his body. The body, in turn is for the heart, 
the soul. The soul has to mount the body like the Haji 
has to ride the camel to reach the 'Ka'aba' (The House 
of Allah in Makkah). In man's case his goal is 
synonimous to it i.e. to achieve the target of the 
'Marafat' of Allah. Instead of keeping his goal of 
reaching the 'Khana-e-Ka'ba' in mind, if the 
aforementioned 'Haji' wastes his time enroute on 
tending to and taking care of the camel all along, he 



82 



has only himself to blame for his gross negligence. 
Dear friend, learn a lesson from it. Do not get involved 
in worldly affairs at the cost of the real aim of life. The 
time wasted in the world in idle occupations of life will 
cost you dearly. Remember that this journey of life is 
actually a journey towards 'Akhirat'. The charisma of 
this world is very alluring. Do not be taken in. Rise 
above the temptations of life. The Holy Prophet (peace 
and the blessings of Allah be upon him) has rightly 
stated that "the world is a greater magician than the 
'Haroot and Maroot" (the famous legendary magician 
demons). The status can be summed up as under. 

(i) The first spell of magic cast by this world on you 
is that it makes you feel that this world and all 
its fascinations are there to stay all the time, 
whereas in fact the reverse is the case. The time 
is fleeting, marching onwords continuously, 
though rather languidly as you lose count of 
time in its happy moments. The passing time, 
its tread in the world is like a shadow. It always 
looks dormant like a shadow which looks still. 
You come to realise later that the shadow is no 
more where it was, to wit, it has shifted and 
moved away slowly and impreceptibly from its 
original position. 

Indeed, the world is in motion. Time and tide 
wait for none. Hence beware and do not let 
grass grow under your feet. A moment gained 
is not lost but a moment lost is never gained. As 
it is, life is short. So why not make the most of 
it. 

(ii) The second instance of the magic of this world 
is that it treats .you as a cherished friend or 



83 



whom it pretends to lavish its souvenirs of 
worldly love and bonhomy, as if like a faithful 
comrade it will always remain with you. It tries 
to enamour you by every enticing guile at its 
command into making you bank on it, that you 
are the only most adored object of its attention. 
Eut later when it leaves you in lurch, you are 
jilted and lost. You get a shock of your life. 
What happens is that like a beautiful woman of 
wayward nature, it leaves you suddenly, weaves 
its silken fetters on some one else, takes such 
easy preys to her perilous parlour and makes 
him taste of death and desolation. 

It is stated that once Prophet, Isa, the Holy 
Christ (peace of Allah be upon him), saw such 
an oft-married woman in the state of 'Kashf 
and asked her how many husbands had she 
wedded? She replied that she had lost count. 
He enquired of her again. D'd they die or you 
obtained divorce from them? She reverted back 
with the answer that she had killed them all! He 
could not help but remark, on hearing this 
woeful reply that "Pity be on the people who 
fell into your spell. Saw what had happened to 
their predecessors yet they walked into your 
spell of beauty, to death and did not learn a 
lesson in time." 

O God! Protect me from her magic! 

The third example in this context is that of an 



84 



elderly woman who covers her lace with an 
appealing veil, decks herself with gorgeous 
garments, decorates her profile in flamboyant 
fashion and puts on rare invaluable jewellery so 
that whoever casts an eye on her may fall in 
love with her straight away. 

This is how the world behaves with man, it tries 
to cast such a spell on him with its charming 
beauty and raptures that he may get out of his 
wits and get stupefied by its amours. 

It casts asunder all thoughts and considerations 
of its arduousness. Man forgets that life is hard 
and earnest. Sometimes he realises it too late. It 
is such a rude shock to him when the old lady 
masquerading as a femme fatalle removes her 
veil and he sees a hideous face instead. The 
Holy Prophet (peace and the blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that on the Day of 
Judgement, the angels will present this world in 
the shape of an ugly old woman for all to 
behold and learn a. lesson. Her eyes will be 
green and she will have uncouth protruding 
teeth. People will see her and exclaim "God 

forbid. Who is this black faced ugly woman?" 
The angels will answer, "This is the same world 
symbolised for you which you liked so much, 
for which you Used to be jealous and quarrel 
with each other." Then this world, will be 
thrown in to Hell. The Hell will ask God 
"Where are my friends"? Then they will also be 
thrown into it. 



85 



(iv) The fourth example is that if someone were to 
try and calculate the period of time that has 
elapsed since the evolution of universe; the 
period when this universe was non existent and 
the time period that is left from now on to its 
end, he will find that doing so is impossible and 
even to think of doing so is crossing the bounds 
of sanity. Simply, all that one knows is that his 
world is 'from the cradle to the grave' i.e the 
cradle is the beginning of his journey through 
life, through this world and the grave is its end. 
There are a few halts in between, one can say, 
comprising the years, the months, the days and 
finally the breaths he takes. Some body covers 
a long distance and somebody small. Whether 
Ions or small the man's world, his life span is 
short but he forgets this important point 
completely. He lives here as if he is going to 
live for ever. How ironical, that although he is 
not sure even of his next breath, he plans for 
things for the next ten years to come so that he 
may not feel their want or fall short of them. He 
may not live to see that day! 

(v) Over indulgence in the pleasures of life is as 
damaging for the 'Akhirat' of man as overeating 
is for a greedy glutton. A glutton pounces on 
rich, sweet or hot, spicy, greasy food and 
devours it licentiously not caring about the 
consequences of burdening his stomach with 
such heavy stuff and nonsense. With the result 
that he starts vomiting and having loose 
motions. For momentary taste and pleasure, his 
excessiveness puts him to such indignity, 
suffering and shame. Even the excreta he emits 



* t ^ 



86 



after such a wild course is sickening and 
abnoxious. It has therefore been observed that 
the more one indulges in the lust and 
lasciviousness in this world the more he is 
degraded in the hereafter. At the final hour in 
the last spasms of his breath the more the man 
measures money, gold, silver, garden, servants 
and maids in his harem the more severe will be 
his pangs of separation from them. On the 
contrary a poor man will have no regrets. Such 
pangs of pain only add to his already 
deteriorating condition culminating in his 'Azab' 
i.e the retribution of his evil deeds. 

Another extraordinary factor of life is that the 
affairs of this world have an imminence about 
them. They look like normal chores, routine 
and not difficult. Oblivious of all other concepts 
and considerations man becomes totally 
absorbed in them. He does not realise that there 
are wheels within wheels and wheels therein. 
One thing leads to an other, resultantly all his 
life is wasted. The Prophet Isa, the Holy Christ 
(peace of Allah be upon him) , has said that the 
seeker of this world is like that man who has his 
lips attached to the shore of the sea and he is 
eagerly absorbed in quenching his thirst from it 
unabatedly. His thirst seems to increase. The 
more he drinks the more he desires to do so. 
Ultimately he dies in this useless pursuit, yet 
unsatiated. Such is the 'La'anat', the curse of 
the lust. The Holy Prophet (peace and the 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has remarked 
about such a person that "it is not possible that 
he may be soiled in water and not get wet." 



87 



Such a person of this kind, who has such a 
pronounced craze for this world will definitely be 
sullied by it." 

The seventh example about this world is like 
that of a guest who goes to a host who is very 
wealthy and is in the habit of lavishly treating 
his guests who come to him in large members 
due to the quality of the reception. He serves 
them with sumptuous food in gold and silver 
receptacles of exquisite design and decor in the 
aromatic atmosphere of ebony and amber afire 
In silver stove. A sensible guest who happens to 
understand his nature partakes of it thankfully, 
adds a little perfume of his own to it and takes 
his leave of the host gracefully, to their mutual 
satisfaction. 

On the other hand the greedy guest tries to rob 
his worthy host of his valuable belongings, after 
his hospitality and in the process gets nabbed 
and disgraced by his assistants. The human lust 
and it's depraved desires are lecherous. 

In this journey through the world, one's own 
rightfully acquired possessions are his own true 
belongings which he can carry with him as his 
baggage. In this 'caravan sarai' he can only 
benefit from the valid and the veritable. The 
avarice will do him no good, 
i) The next example of the world i.e. of it's 
engaging nature is such that man gets lost in £ 
So much so that he forgets the 'Akhirat , the 
hereafter completely. For instance a group of 
people board a «hip. They reach an island 



\ 



88 



enroute where they stop for a while for a short 
respite, general cleanliness and to make 
ablutions. The captain announces that the ship 
has to depart soon hence they should attend to 
all their needs quickly and reboard the craft 
quickly. The sensible of them do so 
expeditiously whereas the other group of the 
indolent scatter here and there, go out of sight 
seeing unnecessarily, enjoying the scenic beauty 
of the place, its flora and fauna and colourful 
sea shells. When they return, they find that the 
comfortable places on the vessel have all been 
taken. Therefore they have to sit in dark and 
dingy nooks. The next party of people who 
come after them bring a heavy load of these 
conches with them, They got worse places than 
their predecessors due to their similar wasteful 
excursions. They get so confounded that they 
hardly find any place to sit on board. In 
addition, they have to carry the load of these 
beautiful shells tied around their necks After 
two days these shells turn black and start 
stinking. What is worse that for want of space 
they can not even dispel this burden. Equally 
heavy is their shame and repentence. The last 
group of idlers get so engrossed in the island's 
explorations that in their vagaries they 
completely fail to take notice of the captain's call 
for quick assembly, miss their ship and die in 
the wilderness. 

a. w lU . nutshe11 ' the first Sroup of them is like that of 
he Muslims and the last of them that of the 'Kafirs' 
(Idolaters) These misguided people are like those 
people who have forgotten Allah, His Holy Prophet 



89 



(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) and the 
Day of the Judgement. 

"They have profaned the love of the world 
as against the Hereafter." 

The intermediary two groups are the sinners 
who erred against their better judgement and 
prescribed course of behaviour. They suffer in this 
world and the Hereafter. Allah punishes them for their 
misdeeds. 

Beware that all this is not the condemnation of 
the world, as such. After all the world has been 
created by Allah, hence it can not be without purpose. 
All things in this world are not bad. For instance the 
'Ilm' in itself and the 'Amal' (performance as per 
prescribed conduct) are two virtues of significance in 
their own right. So much so, that both of them are 
ostensibly in this world, but will actually accompany the 
man to the 'Akhirat'. For example the 'Ilm' of the 
'Marafat of Allah' and its prosecution is the culmination 
of man's existence. The 'Amal', his conduct and his 
good deeds have their own positive lasting effect viz 
the consequent purity and piety of the soul which 
comes of discarding of the evil and the nourishment of 
the 'Rooh' by devoted worship of Allah. The constant 
rememberence of Allah i.e. His perpetual 'Zikr' is the 
ever lasting reward of man. 

(f\:w^ii) .... JTjJUP^c^^ic-iJu 
But the lasting deeds of righteousness are 



90 



better in reward with thy Lord.... (18 : 46) 

The lusciousness, the delight of the 'Zikr' i.e. 
the remembrance of Allah is exquisite. We worship 
Him and enjoy its enchantment in this world but 
actually it does not pertain to it. It is the blessing of the 
hereafter. There is a joy of this world which expires as 
soon as the man dies. But the delight of His love and 
His worship lives forever. The Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) has said:- 

"The world and its worldly assets are 
anathematical. But those things which 
aid and assist a person in remembering 
the God are blessed." 

This treatise on the world and its many traits is 
hitherto sufficient for the purpose of the present 
discourse. It's corollaries and other related matters will 
Inshallah be dicussed in due course. 



AAKHIRAT: THE HEREAFTER 



Remember, that unless you come to know the 
reality of the death, you will not be able to understand 
what 'Aakhirat' i.e the Hereafter means. The actuality 
of death in turn has a direct reference and bearing to 
life The veracity of life lies in trying to comprehend 
the significance of 'Rooh' which in other words 
tantamounts to the knowledge of the 'Nafs . To all 
intents and purposes the 'Rooh' and the 'Nafs are 
synonimous. We have hitherto already arrived at the 
conclusion that the man has been created in the form 
of tea skeleton with its complete infrastructure and the 
'Rooh' the soul. It is worth while reiterating that nitty 
gritty the 'Rooh* is the rider and the body is the mount 
on which it rides. 

The 'Rooh' will be in Paradise or in 'Hell' 
according to its form, the worth, irrespective of the 
skeleton, the body. It will either be consecrated or 
condemned. The heart's happy assets invoked by the 
Divine favour on him without the 'Qalib', the body are 
called the 'Bahisht-e-Roohani' i.e the Paradise of the 
soul The God's blessed man with such a 'Rooh will be 
rewarded in the hereafter with beauti ul palacious 
castles, gardens and the 'Hoors' i.e. the Hoons (The 
untouched celestial fair maidens of ravishing beauty^ 
In antithesis to it, the soul in throes of agony and 
suffering owing it's ill deeds without the Qahb , the 
body is termed as 'Atish-e-Roohoni' viz the 'Burning 
Rooh' It's abode will be Hell. Thorny hedges and the 
scorpions will be his co-mates. Greater details on the 

91 



92 



subject are available in this work's companion volume 
The Ahya-ul-Uloom'. Not many people know much 
about the 'Mailt' or death, on which we have touched 
here people prefer to dwell more on the Hell and 
Heaven rather than on the subject of death. It has 
been stated in 'Hadith-e-Qudsi' that:- 



"For My righteous Servants has been 
prepared (such joys) that have not been 
seen by any eye, nor heard by any ear 
nor distilled in the heart of any human 
beirig." 



Furthermore, there is a window open in the 
man's heart towards the celestial hemisphere through 
which it sees the mysteries of the unknown. It does, not 
come to know of them by heresay but it actually views 
them and sees the state of the blessedness in the 
'Akhirat' or that of being condemned in the hereafter. 
He discerns vividly the pronounced difference between 
the two conditions of being healthy or sick as a Tabib' 
or a physician will do. He becomes fully alive to the 
virtue of taking proper medicine in illness and in that 
of following the 'preventions' stipulated by the doctor, 
by desisting from those things which he has forbidden.' 
This process is called the Sa'adat-e-Badan', the 
blessedness of the body. Vice versa, the over- 
indulgence like over-eating and paying no heed to his 
doctor is bad and is called the 'Shakawat-e-Badan' i.e. 
the illness of the body. The practical observation makes 
him behold clearly that the heart, the 'Rooh' of 'Adam' 



93 



the man has both, the virtue and vileness in it. The 
'cure' to get the reward of virtuousness lies in the 
worship and the 'Marafat of Allah' while the curse the 
venom of the vileness is contained in the stupidity of 
ignorance and in ignoble conduct. To acquire this 
knowledge is to acquire great wisdom. Many of the 
people who have themselves called the 'Ulema , the 
learned are actually not only not learned in this 
knowledge but are also it's 'Munkars' or antilogists. 
Surely, knowing a thing makes one 'Alim' aid not, no 
knowing it. Yet, there they are. They know of physical 
'Badani 'Bahisht or Dozakh' i.e. physical Paradise or 
Hell only. To them, Akhirat is confined to the heresay 
or in following the 'Oft-followed', blindly. Needless to 
add that we have penned down the facts in study and 
research of the subject based on sound arguments, in 
Arabic and else where. 

We can under the circumstances only add that 
an intelhgent and astute person whose 'Batin o the 
^ L pure and unprejudiced will find the righteous 
;1 leS to the judgement of the —r in i s 
nacent truth, unlike quite a few people, who 
completely in the dark about it. 

To understand the verity of ^J^J~* 
about death, you have to know in the first instance 
^eman has two kinds of 'Roohs, the souls. The 
^Rooh e-HaTwani means the physical, the animal 
•Rooh' The other is called the 'Rooh-e-lnsani', which 
is like the soul of the angels in man. The source, the 
dJfa! he fountain of the animal soul is that lump of 
flesh called the 'Dil', the heart which is placed on the 
upper lide of the man. It has the following distinct 
features:- 



94 

(i) It consists of delicately naive febricity of physical 
conjugation moderate nature. 

(ii) This febricity or light teverishness which in its 
own genesis is rather moderate, emanates from 
the veins of the heart, reaches the brain and the 
other parts of the body. 

(iii) It is pulsating. 



In nutshell, this is the animal 'Rooh', the animal 
soul which is carrying and conducting the onus of the 
medium and movement. When it reaches the brain its 
warmth is reduced. It becomes clement. The eyes can 
see through it and the ears hear. It gradually extends 
to all 'Hawas' — sensations. The 'Rooh' can be 
compared to a lamp. When it reaches the house, the 
walls around where it is placed are lit up. In the same 
manner as this lamp enlightens the surroundings, the 
parts around it, in a house; Allah in His benign mercy 
confers 'Noor' i.e. light, the power to see in the eyes 
and the capability to hear in the ears by this 'Rooh' 
and all 'Hawas', the sensory organs are recapacitated. 

On the other hand if some vein gets affected 
and becomes twisted or knotted, it is apt to get 
paralised, listless and dormant and the 'Tabib' the 
doctor tries his best to see that this knot opens up — is 
removed somehow. In other words the soul, the 
'Rooh' is like the flame of the lamp, the heart is the 
wick and its food is the oil. Without the oil the lamp is 
dowsed. Without food i.e. the oil the moderate 
temperament of the 'Rooh' comes to a standstill and 
the animal dies. 



however, the oil be there but the wick may be 



95 



sucking much oil, it means that it has become defective 
and the stage may reach when it may not work at all. 
This is what finally happens to the heart i.e. it becomes 
incapable to accept and assimilate its food. 

Likewise if the lamp is it with something, it will 
extinguish in toto, despite the presence of the wick and 
the oil. Similarly an animal dies when it is senously 
wounded. 

Let us take the example of the looking glass. As 
long as it remains neat and clean it accepts whatever is 
projected to it and mirrors it very satisfactory 
However, it can not do so when it becomes dirty and 
tarnished. The pictures and faces of things do not 
become in visible in it not because they are not there 
but not because the mirror becomes too soiled and 
hence incapable to reflect images. 

Likewise the capacity of the medium to enable it 
to stir and of the sensibilities of the limbs in the Rooh- 
e-Haiwani', the animal soul, (the animal Rooh) is on 
account of it's inherent natural temperament of 
moderation and also owing to it's fine, delicately naive 
febricity. But, as soon as this trait of the clement 
nature, it's temperance is lost, its forces which work as 
a 'prime mover' ceases to operate. Thus this unique 
blessing of Allah is forfeited. The animal organs stop 
functioning and the man is declared dead The job of 
the Arch angel assigned by the Almighty A lah known 
to us as the 'Malaikul Maut' i.e. the 'Angel of Death 
starts. The cognizance of such matters is best known to 
him We know him by heresay as 'Malikul Maut or the 
'Angel of Death' but his real integrity is m the 



96 

knowledge of but a few. 



differ I t qU ff° n ° f man ' S death is "owever 
different. In addition to the animal 'Rooh' described 
above he has another 'Rooh' also in him wS is 
called Rooh-e-Insani', i.e. the man's 'Rooh' or his 
heart. This 'Rooh', unlike the aforementioned physical 
or organic soul in on a much higher plane. It does not 
accept division. It's importance and significance can be 
visualised by the fact that it can contain the 'Marafat' of 
Allah. Verily, Allah is also one and only. The division 
of His Marafat', God forbid, is therefore also thus not 
tenable. Hence the concept of His 'Marafat' to be 
considered circumscribed in any bodily form is 
tantamount to blasphemy. 

Dear friend, If for the sake of argument we 
were to pre-suppose the presence of the wick, its flame 
and the light in man, then we would only be able to 
ascribe the physical components of the lamp viz its 
structure and the wick to the animal form, then too we 
will not be able to connote its light to it as such in 
conformity with the 'Insani Rooh' i.e. the 'Rooh'' of 
man. It is obvious, because the former is transient but 
he later is not i.e. the physical lamp's light is subject to 
the lamp. If the lamp is shattered, its light will be 
extmguished. But the man's real 'Rooh' is never 
extinguished or obviated although his animal 'Rooh' 
may perish. In a way the animal 'Rooh' in man is the 
mount of his real 'Rooh' on which it saddles and 
gallops. It is also, the wherewithal the apparatus for 
him to do so, to his benefit. Therefore when this 
mount perishes, the man loses its usage. Just as well 
as in its absence he gains more confidence and 
becomes more independent and self reliant. It matters 



97 



the least to him specially when during this period the 
man has, worked so hard that he has already achieved 
some merit of reckoning and position of the 
noteworthy. To put a stamp of authority on this 
facturm de glory, the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has also said that 
"Death is a present, a boon for a IMomin' (The man of 
faith, a Mussalman)." 

The situation is similar to that of a hunter who is 
in the field with his hunting gear, the shooting 
paraphernalia. For the sake of argument if he succeeds 
in getting the game for which he has specifically come 
all the way but loses his gear, he is still better off. 
Alternatively, God forbid if he loses his hunting gear 
before he gets his prey, his condition would, as such, 
become virtually that of the game itself to his chagrin. 
There is a profound lesson in it for the sane. Such a 
man meets his Waterloo at his own hands. 'Azab-e- 
Qabr' or the retribution of the 'Akhirat' overtakes him. 
He suffers innumerable agonies. 

One may be paralysed in certain limbs. His 
hands and feet may stop working. One should 
remember that he has just lost use of these 
instruments. What can't be cured must be endured. 
Hence, as long as the man, the master agent is there, 
alive, the importance of these organs is secondary. 
One's truth, the reality is therefore not in them, not in 
the back, stomach or in the head. For that matter, 
even if all the organs of man's frame, his body cease to 
work, desist from being his servants and they do not 
remain in his control yet his immanence is possible, as 
the animal 'Rooh' is not the same as the 'Insani Rooh'. 
There are however two aspects to it which need to be 



98 



re-emphasised viz:- 

(i) In one kind of existence, the active participation 
of the body is essential. The hunger, thirst, the 
sleep etc are the phenomena that do not take 
place or function without the physical form but 
die when the man dies. 

(ii) In the other existence, there is no existence of 
the body. This existence is the grand prix of 
Allah's 'Marafat', of the persuit for the 'Jamal-e- 
Ilahi', His superb splendour and Glory par 
excellence; beautiful, bewildering and so 
delightfully ravishing that bliss stands stupefied 
in its supreme ecstasy. These are the 'Baqiat-us- 
Salihat' of which Allah makes mention in the 
Holy Book. These 'eternal blessings of the 
blessed the ratified good' are an unparalelled 
reward of Allah, for which the human soul 
should remain ever gratified. His elite, the 
chosen have this quality the foremost in their 
'Nafs' which automatically raises them to an 
ever ascending high pedestal. Vice versa, the 
neglect, the ignorance and the stupidity is the 
other side of it which tontamounts to the 
blightedness and the blindness of the soul. 

And whoso is blind in this (world) shall be 
blind in the Hereafter, and further astray 
from the way. (17:72) 



"Obviously, unless you tend to make out the difference 
between these two kinds of souls in man, you will not 
be able to understand death." 



99 



The 'Rooh-e-Haiwani\ the animal 'Rooh' or 
soul is in the order of the physical coarse, the crude 
being primarily concerned with the rather vaporous 
genetics, as described earlier. Bile, fibrosis and other 
excreta conjoin to form its compound. Their base 
elements are water, fire, dust and air. Hence the 
resultant uniformity or variation marked by their 
interaction is attributed to the relevant heat, cold, 
moisture and dryness. The llm-ul-Tib' or its follower 
viz the Tabib' or the doctor consequently remains fully 
alive to their significance. They however know not that 
in treating the body of their patients they are 
involuntarity trying to make the physical frame of the 
body fit to be ridden over by the 'Rooh-e-Insani', the 
man's soul. Angelic in nature, the 'Nafse Mutmainna', 
the refined soul of man has grand characteristics. 
Summum bonum, man's journey through life is not of 
his own volition. He is ordained to do so: to show his 
true worth on this path of pitfalls, and make it with 
flying colours to the goal post and get his reward of 
the hard toil and tribulations gallantly faced in this 
arduous passage by him. Allah says:- 

(T A : a jL)\) 'ii'j'pH 'fp* U'j* & ^ui 

We said: 'get you down from here all 
together; there shall come to you guidance 
from Me; then whosoever follows My 
guidance, no fear shall be on them, nor 
shall they grieve. (2 : 38) 

God, the Merciful has also added: - 



100 



< vr ' v,: >> 

I am going to create man from clay so 
when I have fashioned him and breathed 
into him (His) soul created by Me. 

(38 : 71, 72) 

In this verse there is a subtle reference to the 
difference between these two 'Roohs', the two souls. 
One has been attributed to the dust and the word 
'Sooyatan' has been used to impart the meaning of it's 
temperance in nature whereas 'Nafkhat fehe min 
Roohi' is a delicate pointer to 'His Own Self. It is like 
making a torch of cotton wool to set it on fire to 
eradicate the germs of the disease. 

The principal factor, it may be remembered, is 
the 'Shariat', (The ratified code of conduct of man) 
which acts as his guide, the moderator and the 
monitor. In final analysis, we come again to the same 
thing viz the essence of the existence of man being in 
his realization of his ownself to gain the 'Marafat' of 
Allah. 'Kama Murra' i.e. how to understand and 
recognise one's self is the key to how to try and obtain 
the 'Marafat' of Allah. In the same way, to understand 
the truth about these 'Arwah' these 'Roohs', these 
souls is to try to attain the 'Marafat' or knowledge of 
'Aakhirat', the hereafter. 

The basic foundation of the 'Deen\ the Faith 
inter alia other pre-requisites lies in explicit faith in the 
Allah and His ordained 'Day of Judgement'. Therein 
lies a secret recondite in it's seclusion which we are not 
allowed to touch upon. Nor can it be understood or 
broached with facility as in it's deep depths lies hidden 
the 'Marafat-e-Haq' and the 'Aakhirat' i.e. the verity of 
the Most Supreme Lord and His promised 'Last Day'. 



101 



So, you may totally enter into and exhaust your 
wisdom in endeavouring to get tt's 'Marafat'. It's 
research is so eerie, so uncanny, so intricate that it 
verges on the unfathomable to the extent that those 
who have heard the least about it were owe-struck, got 
stupefied and declined to accept even the alphas and 
omegas of it and exclaimed that ft is impossible, based 
on impiety of thought and on an utterly unworthy 
excerdse in futility. Neither the 'Hadith' nor the Holy 
Qur'an bears on the issue. Then how will you be able 
to dare to do so? That is why people just can not listen 
to it. The prophets have therefore stated. 

"Speak to the people according as to (the 
level of) their intelligence." 

That is why some of the prophets were apprised 
by Allah, to not to touch upon those traits of God 
Almighty which the people may not be able" to 
understand because when they will not be able to 
comprehend them they would decline to believe them, 
which would be injurious to them. 

The truth about the real 'Rooh' of man has 
been discussed in detail. The 'animal Rooh' dies when 
the limbs of the body of man become inert and lifeless. 
The 'Rooh-e-Insani' remains manifest regardless. 
Therefore the. terms resurrection of man, the 'Rose 
Hashr' (The Day of Judgement) and Rejuvenation, do 
not mean in derivation that "after 'nothingness' the 
man would be brought into existence as such, again. 
Therefore the terms resurrection of man, the 'Rose 
Hashr' (the Day of Judgement) and rejuvenation do 
not mean in derivation that "after nothingness" the 



102 



man would be brought into existence as such again. 
Rather it means that he will be given the form, the 
'Qalib' a new, the way it was done formerly and then 
he would again he refurbished with the requisite 
characteristics and qualities. It would be very easy." 

It is so, because the man was ordained to be 
created. There was also the question of the 4 Rooh\ 
The 'Rooh' being manifest, the parts of the 'Qalib' the 
man's infrastructure being there in their proper places, 
their unification would be easier than their reinvention. 
This is from our i.e. the man's perspective. God is over 
and above all considerations of expediency. He can 
do, and does whatever He likes and considers the 
best. It is simply a matter of His 'Qudrat' i.e. His 
Supreme Power and Will. 

Also, as the soul is the mount of the body, if 
the mount changes, the 'sawar', the rider the 'Rooh' 
will remain the same. Hence the endowment of the 
first form to man is not necessary in the hereafter. 
Besides, right from childhood to man's bid age the 
physiognomy of man keeps on undergoing gradual 
change but his real 'Rooh' remains the same 
throughout. 

This thinking was strongly opposed by its 
opponents. It was argued that the same body that the 
man had in this world would be given to him in the 
next world. The bitter antagonists went to the extent to 
question that if a man was to eat another man arid 
their human parts got amalgemated then to whom and 
how would these entwined parts be reassigned on the 
Day of the Judgement. They also propounded the 



103 



theory and rellied that if an organ of a man's body was 
removed from his body and if that man offered prayers 
then would the torn away part get the Sawaab (the 
blessings and reward) of the prayer? They went on to 
ask that if that part of the man's body which was cut 
off from him did not get the Sawaab of the mans 
prayers how would he go to Paradise without that limb 
and so on and so forth? People raise such silly 
arguments and there are those who answer them in 
the same vein, hence the less said the better. 

The debate of these dissenters is based on the 
hypothesis that if the 'Qalib', the form and structure of 
the man as in this world is not to be given to him in 
the next, then his bodily structure would also not be of 
any use. Such reasoning is based on a weak premise 
hence it is not tangible. 

If you say that ft is the firm belief and the creed 
of the theologeons that the man dies when no life 
remains in his body and that he would be resurrected 
into the same shape and form contrary to what has 
been stated herefore, in that case it's simple answer is 
that a blind follower of whatever the other says is blind 
himself. The man who believes in the mortajity of the 
'Jan' the soul of man is neither a critic nor an adherer 
of distinction. If he were a sage he would know that as 
per the Holy Qur'an and the Hadith; the soul the 
'Rooh' of man whether it be the 'Rooh of Ashqiya (the 
'Rooh' of the cursed and the condemned) or the Rooh; 
of the Sa'ada' i.e. the ('Rooh' of the blessed and the 
sacred people) do not die. 

"j; * u# -to S*? 'J W **** d 



104 



(>V.«n5:0>*Ji) 

Do not reckon those who are killed in the 
way of Allah as dead, but living, with their 
Lord provided, rejoicing in what Allah has 
given them of His bounty.... (3 : 169,170) 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 

^ZeJ: h *Mu°l tB * dr '> addre - d them and 
said Indeed my Allah has proved the truth of what 
He has proclaimed about My enemies. What would 

iu5L?S T 111 n ° W? " Peo *> le were 

Aey « rl^W " Y ° U ^ ta,kin « to thc - ^ut 

mv ^ L 1 **** by AUah - ,n wh <*« hands 

^are but h ^ ^ " ^ ™ better than 
you are, but they can not answer back." 

i . T ! K ?? Wh0 ponder ovcr *e 'Ahadtth' the 
Plural of Hadith (the sayings of the Holy IropZ 

fccTth* 'ST** ° f ^ UP °" him > toTe 
effect that the dead are not only aware of their 

mourners; of those who have come to pay homage to 

*em but are also aware of what is happening in thfc 

world, can not as such gainsay the truth of this fact 

The complete extinction of the dead is not specified 

anywhere in the 'Hadith'. Rather, there is a mention 

of the change of the 'Sifaf, the entity or the chTngTof 

a^dun^VwH^ ^ ,Qabar '» *• Sr-e is either 
LkIT^ x n f H f ° r 8 9arden the many 

orchards of Paradise. Hence you should bear in minS 



105 

that neither the soul of man dies when he dies nor it's 
specific characteristics are altered in any way. Of 
course, the 'Hawas' and the organs of the body 
become permanantly still. 

It is evident that if the horse of a man who has 
sight, dies, the rider does not become blind. In the 
same manner, you are the knight rider and your body 
is the horse that you ride on, owing to the meritorious 
soul you possess. The soul is predominant. The mount 
it gallops on is secondary in status. That is why those 
who are fortunate, and whose hearts are filled with the 
love of God, remove all sensations of this world from 
their 'Nafs', delve deep into their being and get 
completely engrossed in their 'Maraqaba' (Self 
concentration) in search of enlightenment of the 
'Marafat' of their 'Rooh' and in the 'Marafat' of Allah. 
Such is the beginning of the people of Tassawaf i.e. 
the search of the truth. These are the people whose 
quest is so true; their toil in the path and the cause of 
Allah is so great that they get to see far into the realm 
of the unseen. Their souls rise above the sphere of the 
'Nafse Haiwani', (The animal Nafs), the animal Soul 
and soar high to an enchanting domain where they 
come to know more, sitting here, in the state of being 
alive and awake, than what the souls of the dead 
come to know after death. 

Such is the flight of their 'Nafs'. However, when 
they return to the 'Alam-e-Mahsoosat' the animal 
world of sensory perceptions, some of them do not 
even remember or recall whatever they have 
experienced in this state of deep meditation of the 
soul, although at times some feeble traces of it do 



106 



remain back. That is, if the man has been in a Paradise 
like state, a certain touch of ecstasy lingers. Whereas if 
he has been seeing the conditions pertaining to the 
Hell or some of its affiliated things, he feels a modicum 
of heaviness afterwards and at times apprises others of 
it. Likewise if he sees thing of some examplary nature, 
its percepts remain with him for some time. He may 
inform others of it. Like the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) extended his hand 
during his prayers and said that "a bunch of grapes of 
the garden of Paradise was shown to me. I wanted to 
bring it, into this world." 

Do not think that to bring this bunch of grapes 
into this world was possible. It was not so due to it's 
verity of status. Had it been possible the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) would 
definitely have done so. To fathom this impossibility is 
difficult and it is also not necessary for you to 
understand it. The 'Ulema' vary. Somebody may start 
conjecturing 'what kind of' a bunch of grapes in this 
that He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
saw it but the other participants in the prayers with him 
did not see? God forbid an other 'Alim may say that:- 

"A . little movement does not cause 
infringement of the prayer." 

This shows the difference in the thinking of the 
people and the 'Mama* vis a vis their concepts? 

Such a man relies on heresay, rather than on 



107 

real substance. He is also totally unaware of Tassawaf 
and is unconcerned with 'Shariyat'. He is a novice who 
should not be given much credence. 

Such people are contentious. Naturally there is 
a lot of difference between fact and fiction. But the 
truth always triumphs. From the foregoing it to not 
implied to cast any aspersious on them. For instance 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upor! I him) not only used to be informed and instructed 
by Allah vide his 4 Vahi' (Briefing through arch angel 
Gabriel) about all matters including the fact and 
composition of Mannat' but also he was shown this 
promised Paradise in his grand tour de excellence, 
from this world to the regal realm of Allah s Supreme 
Baneflciene, called the 'Ha'raj' Allah rewarded Him 
with such unique kindness, the sight of which was 
never, ever allowed to any person or prophet. TWs 
temporary absence from this world is called 
'Ghayoobiyal'. It is of two kinds. 

(i) Due to the death of 'Rooh-e-Haiwani' i.e. the 
death of the animal Rooh in man. 

(ii) Due to it's incapacitation. 

No one in this world can see the Paradise, like 
the seven layers of the earth and the seven spheres of 
the skies above can not be enclosed in the shel of a 
ground nut. Presumably, even a particle of the 
Paradise can not be contained in this world. So to the 
power of the sight circumscribed. It can not see the far 
horizons above en masse. Our senses of observation 
are desperately limited, to be able to fully encompass 
the span of Paradise. In fact, the sensibilities of that 



108 t 

world are different. 

Now, we come to the subject of the 'Azab-e- 
Qabr' i.e. the retribution of the evil deeds committed 
by a person, the punishment accorded by Allah for the 
wrong doings of man when he dies. We have already 
determined that the 'Rooh', the soul does not die, the 
body, .the frame of man does. Human limbs and 
organs become inert for good. Even the 'Hawas' the 
five senses of discernment of the sight, touch, the 
hearing, speaking and tasting are snatched away from 
man the moment his relevant organs become dead. In 
nutshell when this happens, the deceased would not 
be able to see his wife, children, the worldly goods, - 
his land, farms, maids, servants, cows, buffalos, home 
and hearth, friends, kith and kin and the like that he 
cherished so much in life, any more. They will be 
taken away from him. As these things were very dear 
to him. It would tantamount to such a collosal loss to 
him for which the severest pangs of sufferings will be 
the net result. If, on the other hand, he did not dote 
on them and longed for death, preparing himself for it 
ardently all the while, remembering that from Him I 
have come and unto Him shall I return', he will not be 
the least affected. On the contrary he will be all the 
more happy to return to his Master whose love had ' 
remained kindled in his heart in this world for ultimate 
union with Him. Consider his joy who has yearned for 
the love of some one and has ultimately achieved his 
heart's quest by being near him. Only true lovers, the 
ardent souls know the worth of such a bliss. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has therefore said that:- 



109 

"You may love and cherish whosoever 
you may like but remember that you will 
be separated from him." 

The *Azab-e-Qabr' is therefore for the evil, the 
wicked and lustful man, seeker of the temporary joys 
of the world vis a vis the man aspiring for the eternal 
ecstasy of being near his Most Beautiful Beloved for 
whom he has anxiously waited for so long. You can 
appreciate his mirth in the cause of the Allah and also 
conceive the petty rejoicing of the man of the world for 
the trivial happiness of the mundane things of life. For 
whom is the 'Azab-e-Qabr' then, for the proud or the 
profane? In the sufferings of his 'Azab', the evil doer 
will understand the meanings of this 'Hadith. 

"The world is a prison of the believer and 
a Paradise of the disbeliever." 

So, the basic and the most important cause of 
this •Azao-e-Qabr' is the avarice for life and its 
temptations which veer the man away from the path of 
the Allah, of His rememberance, His love, the 
obedience to His commands and His devotion and 
worship. The punishment accorded to a wicked person 
is however in proportion to his deeds. A dreadful 
person drenched to the depths in villianous deeds, 
licentuous acts and worst forms of orgy and 
debauchery is penalised the most. However if a person 
loves just one evil thing, he will suffer much less than 



110 



the man who gets blind in the vain love of say, the 
land, earthy cocquetries and blandishments, of 
beautiful maidens, servants, horses, elephants and in 
similar things of pomp and show. Naturally a man who 
has lost one horse will suffer less than the person, ten 
of whose horses have been stolen by the thieves. It is 
logical that the more worldly goods, the more riches a 
man possesses in this world, the more he is likely to be 
attatched to it and get enmeshed in its silken webs. So 
much so, that he forgets the purpose of his life 
completely and entrusts himself to this world in toto. 
His condition is depicted in the following verses of the 
Holy Book:- 

(1.V:J*Jll) 

That is because they desired the present 
life against the Hereafter.... (16 : 107) 

■Such a person will get very severe punishment 
As regards the Tabir' or the explanation of this verse 
the Hply Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) asked His 'Sahaba-e-Kiram' (His worthy 
companions). "Are you aware of the background of 
this verse of the Holy Book?" * 

But whoso turns away from My 
Remembrance, he shall have a narrow 
life - (20:124) 

They humbly answered that only Allah or His 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) know it. 



Ill 



The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) elucidated that ninety nine venomous 
snakes with nine heads each are installed on a kafir 
(An infidel) in the grave who keep on snapping at him 
and biting him till the Dooms Day. Those with the eyes 
of the 'Batin', the soul confirmed this fact but the fools 
and the fool hardy said that 'we have seen for 
ourselves. There were no asps in the graves of the 
'Kafirs'." 

These simpletons do not know that these snakes 
are like the evil 'Arwah', the evil souls of the dead. 
'The 'kafirs' souls are already infested by them by dint 
of their deeds and die-hard devilry, but they are not 
aware of them. The number of heads of these snakes 
can likewise be compared to the protuding branches of 
their ugly traits, Friendship of the crimes of this world 
is the conscience of this viper. The real substance of 
these snakes evolves out of the worldly depravity, 
comprising such menaces as jealousy, spite, duplicity, 
arrogance, greed, treachery and love and lust for 
worldly power verging on brutality. Such ungrateful 
wretches knew the God and the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) but declined to 
believe in them. On the contrary they devoted 
themselves totally to the world. That is why Allah 
said:- 



"1 



(\ .V: J~J>) 



That is because they desired the present 
life against the Hereafter.... (16 : 107) 



112 



He, the Almighty also said, 
(Y . : *JU#^l) 

You had your good things in your worldly 
life and enjoyed them.... (46 : 20) 

So, how can the 'kafir' escape from these 
snakes who dwell in him. Like a man first sold a 
beautiful slave girl out of greed but later fell in love 
with her. The snake of lust dwelt in him. The greed 
and lust were the snakes that bit him constantly. How 
miserable he became? Only if he had realised their 
% venom in time. Then he could saved from the 
sufferings that he later lamented so grievously. 

Likewise, these ninety nine snakes were already 
concealed in the 'Batin' of this 'Kafir'. He was not 
aware of them. They started biting when he fell in 
love. He felt the anguish all the more when the snakes 
started biting him ferociously in his pangs of separation 
from her. If there was no love in the first instance; the 
greed later and the poignancy of the separation from 
her the last, there would not have been any torture, 
any 'Azab'. In the same manner, the love of the 
worldly joy of life which is so engaging here, becomes 
the misery and woe in the hereafter. All these worldly 
attractions of different kinds are snakes and scorpions 
in the end. One can perhaps think of dealing with the 
worldly snakes in some way but these asps of the 
'Batin', concealed in the souls are the worst. That is 
why the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 



113 



upon him) has said:- 

"Verily, it is your own actions that will 
react upon you." 
t 

And the Almighty has ordained that:- 

o ;^Ji Vjji o jj* b'jj* us- 

(V.a : p^Ji ^ ifjji 

No indeed; had you the knowledge of 
certainty! You shall surely see Hell, then 
you shall see it with the eye of certainty. 

(102 : 5-7) 

Surely the Hell encompasses the 
unbelievers. (9 : 49) 

The message is that the 'Kafirs', the idolators are 
encompassed by Hell. 

You may say that according to 'Shariat' if there 
are any snakes they should be visible. The answer is 
that the snakes of the 'Batin' can only be seen by the 
dead. One can not see the things of that world by the 
eyes of this world. To a dead person this snake will be 
visible in the same shape, as in this world. But you can 
not see it. It is just as if a person sees in his sleep that 
his being bitten by a snake. He wakes up crying with a 



114 



start and finds no trace of the snake. While the man 
who has actually seen the snake while he was sleeping, 
will swear that he had seen the snake but the person 
sitting next to him will say that there was no snake. He 
has not seen any. The person who has been bitten by 
the snake while- sleeping is tantamount to his having 
been overpowered by his enemy; defeatea by his 
adversary. Such a travail hurts the heart. If the 
suffering of the two conditions were to be compared, 
he would rather be bitten by one in real life than by a 
snake in the 'Batin'. Therefore the snake in dream, in 
'Batin' should not be discarded as if it is non-existent in 
real life. The snake of the Batin is as real in such a 
case, as is the snake of the cursed in his grave which 
we can not see but the dead person does. It is stated 
that if a person gets away from this world, goes to 
sleep and has a worthy 'Batin', he can see the snake of 
the dead man. The prophets and the 'valis' have such 
exalted souls that they can see such snakes and the 
scorpions of the dead in their graves in the state of 
wakefulness. There is nothing to deter them from 
doing so. They are the blessed. 

They need not do so. Some fools try to look for 
the snakes of the dead in their graves, and not finding 
them there they deny thier existence. 

You may argue that if the 'Azab-e-Qabr' i.e. the 
punishment in the hereafter in the grave is owing to 
the love of man for worldly endowments like the 
riches, pomp and show, kith and kin and other 
tempting things of life, then the man being what he is 
by nature, no one can be immune to it. The answer is 
that:- 



115 



(i) The love of the world should be for the good 

things of the world. 
(U) It should not be at the cost of the 'Aakhirat', the 

Hereafter. 

(Hi) The man should remember that he is in transit 
in this world and his real objective should be his 
good of the nearness to the Allah. He should 
therefore be acting with goodness and virtue 
toward his fellow men, all the time. 

(iv) The love of Allah and His Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) will make 
him the angel like being that he should aspire to 
become. It will automatically excludes all 
temptations, petty joys, vicious greed, anger 
and lust for the hedonistic from him. 

(v) Such a person is always a seeker of death. The 
sooner he reaches his beloved Allah's proximity 
the better for him as his real delight lies in the 
nearness of his 'Mahboob', his cherished 
Beloved. 

Further more, it can be so, that God may bless 
him with worldly goods also. If such a person, is 
thankful to the Lord for having granted him these 
comforts, he absolves himself of all thoughts of 
indulgence in the worldly luxuries that verge on the 
creation of the vice of self display, pomp and show etc 
in his mind. He does not give them greater importance 
than the love of Allah. Such a blessed man is not 
subjected to the 'Azab-e-Qabr'. Such a grateful man 
always remembers that 'all that is of the choicest in this 
world and in the hereafter' belongs to Allah. He 
spends secretly and openly in the name of God and 
for the Allah open handedly and with a large 



116 



benevolent heart. 

It has therefore been observed in the lives of the 
prophets and the 'Aulia' that all considerations of 
God's gifts to them in the shape of worldly goods of 
comfort have always had the least value for them. 
They thank Allah for them and expend them lavishly 
in God's way. Their predominent desire is always of 
leading a simple, non-showy, good life with their 
heart's eyes all the time focussed on the 'Marafat' of 
Allah the Merciful. 

They are so constituted that love of all else 
pales down before the love of God. Hence they go to 
their Allah happily for their ardently cherished 
rendezvous with Him. There can be no greater bliss. 
There can be no greater blessing. However, in 
antithesis those who forget their basic aim of meeting 
Allah; and remain engrossed in this world and the 
worldly desires as If they will remain her for ever, will 
never die, will never be produced before Him for the 
judgement of their dreadful deeds, will earn their own 
•Azab-e-Qabr', themselves. Such people are great in 
number. The Almighty Allah has said:- 

i& dLj Ji* JIST c liijO ill 'JS t»j \ 

And there is none among you, but he shall 
arrive there; it is a thing definite, and 
decreed by thy Lord. Then We shall 
deliver those who are Allah-fearing.... 

(19 : 71,72) 

That is why the 'Kafirs' will suffer for their deeds 



117 



drastically and ever remain submerged in Hell for a 
longtime. 

Consequently; the test, the check for the man 
who claims to be a 'man of God' is that it will not take 
long to watch him before one sees his conduct in the 
light of the following:- 

(i) Does he naturally and instinctively get inclined 
to the good, the clean, the pious. Or does he 
do it to show only? 

(ii) If temptations come in his way, if the worldly 
attractions beckon to him, if the vice calls him, 
does he suppress it with an iron hand and 
follow the dictates of the God. 

(iii) Is he fair and God fearing? If he has two friends 
and likes one of them more than the other, 
how does he act in the crisis? Does he unjustly 
favour that friend of his, whom he likes more or 
acts otherwise and tries to reconcile them, if 
they are fools. 

Actions speak louder than words. Such a man 
will be deciphered in no time. For that reason 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) and his sahabah have always 
asserted that those who utter 'La Iia Ha tyjul 
Lab' do not act otherwive to such grave and 
consecrated truth. In other words to say that 
'There is no God but He is to assert in its finality 
the true verity of the Supreme Truth. After that 
nothing ulterior remains. Naturally, the 'Azab* of 
people will differ according to the magnitude of 
their deeds. 



118 



There are dissenters and dissenters. The stark 
stupid in the height of silliness may actually befool 
themselves in trying to befool others by saying that 'the 
'Azab-e-Aakhirat' does not bother us, as it does not 
apply to us, since we have nothing to do with this 
world'. Then what are they doing here? They should 
be the pious of a very high order to be able to say so. 
The question is, is their integrity so above board? 
Hardly so, for people of such emminence do not have 
to boast of their virtues like this. Virtue is its own 
reward. It is always conspicuous. People see it and 
know it, without any body having to say it. 

For instance if all the worldly possessions of 
such a person amongst them are robbed by some 
thieves and these goods happen to fall in to the hands 
of one of his contemporaries and his 'Murids', the 
disciples leave him and go over to him instead, will he 
consider it of the least importance, without any sense 
of loss and rivalry? Most presumably, not! If he is such 
an elite person he will say "Inna Lilian He Wa Inna 
Ilahe Raajioon" i.e. "To Him belongs all, from Him all 
things emanate and towards Him shall all things 
return," and forget about it. 

Likewise it is easy to say such things. The 
example of such a person has already been quoted 
who sold a beautiful maiden out of greed but when the 
best of her beauty enamoured him he went berserk. A 
good man, a person with the love of the Hereafter; the 
more devoted a servant of God he becomes, the less 
he has instinctively to do with the world and its 
manifestations. He goes to the toilet per force majeure 
but tries to evacuate himself out of its premises as 



119 



quickly as possible. He eats to meet a necessary 
requirement but not to have a hundred dishes of Ala 
carte spread over his dining table, to show off his 
wealth and display his riches. The extra food also goes 
waste, as he can partake of just a little of it : 

Such people of distinction are sparing in their 
needs. They are simple and unobstrusive. Their 
demands are very small. They try to lead a good life. 
Actually they are men of the Hereafter, the friends of 
Allah, the 'Vali's'. They trust in Allah and He is their 
Saviour. They get into the good graces of the 
•Arhamur Rahimeen' (the Most Merciful) and become 
the beneficiaries of the Most Beneficient! 

Now to come to the 'Roohani Dozakh' i.e. the 
Hell of the soul. It has nothing to do with the body. 
Allah, the Almighty says:- 

o &W» J* 'J\ o stfjUt *b\ ju 

(V«^ : 5>jl») 

Kindled Fire of Allah, that mounts up over 
the hearts. (104 : 6,7) 

The heart is encompassed by this hell of the 
soul. The fire that burns the body is called the 'Hell of 
the body'. Actually, there is three kinds of fire in 'Hell 
of the soul.' 

(i) The fire of the pangs of separation from the 
world. 

(ii) The fire of feeling ashamed of worldly ill deeds. 

(iii) The last but not the least, the fire of being 
disgraced before Allah, of having lost His 



120 



favour, of having lost the opportunity of getting 
His nearness. 

Under the circumstances, it is necessary to know 
the major causes of the fire of the 'Roohani Dozakh', 
the Hell of the , Rooh\ which is of three kinds. 

(i) The first kind, we have already discussed in the 
chapter on 'Azab-e-Qabr' (the punishment 
awarded in the grave to the evil ones) is owing 
to man's separation from the worldly desires. 
One can visualise that as long as man lives with 
his beloved i.e. the most, cherished thing in the 
world, he lives in the Paradise of the fulfilment 
of his consummate desire with its delight and in 
other associated joys. But when he separates 
from this charming world he falls into the Hell 
of the distress of its loss. So the lover of the 
world is in paradise during his sojourn in the 
world, only. 

- >l£Jl UUl 

"The world is the paradise of kafir (the 
infidel)." 

Vice versa, in this sense, he would be in hell in 
the 'Aakhirat', in the hereafter. A remarkable example 
to illustrate the condition of such a person is given 
below. 

Such a person can be compared to a mighty 
king who ruled over his kingdom with much pageantry 
and pomp and show. His subjects obeyed him like 



121 



serfs. Caravans laden with gold, silver, pearls, 
peacocks and ivory came to him. He was fabulously 
rich. He had a grand castle with lush green lawns and 
fruit laden, flower-bedded orchards. He utilised the 
services of many slaves and beautiful maidens to please 
him in many ways, as he liked. They were at his beck 
and call all the time and so were many other luxuries 
which satiated him not. He walked around in these 
gardens of pleasure arrogantly, desiring more and 
more to add to his lust and licentiousness. Suddenly 
his rule was upset by somebody. In utter anticlimax, he 
was made to look after the dogs of the kennel of the 
new ruler, who had ended his rule. To add insult to 
injury he was made to do so before his erstwhile 
subjects. Right before his eyes, the new king partook of 
all the luxuries and used his slaves (both men and 
women), whom he used to treat : as his abject personal 
property. You can well imagine his disappointment 
and dismay. The fire of separation from such 
unparalleled pleasures and possessions put him to the 
hell of such hectic agony and felt miserable. We 
reiterate that the greater the indulgence in such worldly 
desires, the greater will be the chagrin of such a man. 
He will keep on being devoured by tts fire. 

Please note that when the man is in the world, 
the heart of such a man gets sprinlked with many kinds 
of ulterior sediments. During the era of life in this 
world, it is his sense and sensibilities which keep him 
going. These sensibilities die when he dies. His is thus 
unalloyad by the worldly stimuli after his death. 
Therefore the man's pleasure or sufferings are far 
greater after his death. Again, thejRre of the hereafter 
is much different to the fire of the world. It is 'watered 



122 



down by seventy waters before it is sent to this world. 

The fire of the second type is due to the 
indignities and shame associated with evil deeds. Some 
of these are so heinous that the man feels direly 
disreputed and disgraced. The consequent humiliation 
is abominable for him. But then it's no use crying over 
spilt milk. 

You can compare the plight of such a person 
from the following example. Suppose a generous king 
gets kindly disposed toward a person of mean » 
temperament, gives him a position of honour, entrusts 
the affairs of the kingdom to him by making him his 
elite assistant and banks on him in all matters with full 
confidence. As one can expect, the man being 
unworthy of such trust due to the shallowness of his 
nature, instinctively revolts against his benefactor by 
misusing his free access to the king's 'Harem' and 
misappropriating the funds of the realm's treasury. 
Ostensibly, he pretends to be loyal to his duties and , 
the king. However, one day the king sees him in his 
true colours from some vantage point. He also comes 
to know of it. How is he likely to feel when he is 
caught red handedly in this manner? The answer is 
obvious. Very guilty! Shame will mantle his face. He 
will be in the dread of his life. Like this he will be 
engulfed by the fire of shame and humiliation in his 
own eyes. 

You may apply this episode to the hereafter 
and make your deductions. Many examples can be 
quoted to this effect. Such a person can be upto any 
thing. Suppose he is aimlessly throwing stones at a 



123 



wall which he realizes is the wall of the place where 
his children are. They get hurt due to his stupidity. 
You can foresee for yourself how he will feet. Such a 
person ruins his own Faith, his own 'Deen' with his 
own hands. In his bleak behaviour he forgets the 
cousequences. He is a misanthrope. Jealousy and 
hatred of his fellow men is his principal trait. Jealousy 
is a green eyed monster. In it's grip he tries to harm 
others but instead harms himself more. He keeps on 
burning in its fire. He does not realize that, if, on the 
other hand he serves humanity, the angels will render 
•Noor' (celestial light of heavenly qualities) into his eyes 
rather than the black cast of antipathy, which may be 
blinding for him. 

A man's word is his bond. The person who is 
treacherous is first the worst enemy of his own self, 
before he may be liable for this servile offence to 
others. Such a person is so selfcentred and so greedy 
that he can be upto any vile act, as long as he is at 
large. 

There are also some of them who are like 
wolves in sheep's clothing. An instance is quoted when 
a person went to Imam Ibn-e-Sireen (R.A), an 
accomplished seer in deciphering the meanings of the 
dreams He took the seer into his confidence and told 
him that he had seen a dream in which he saw himself 
putting a seal stamp by his signet ring on the lips of 
men and the uterous of women. Imam Sireen who did 
not know the man, informed him that he was a 
Moazzan and as for the interpretation of his dream, he 
advised him to stop the evil habit of calling the 
morning prayer's 'Azaan' (the call for prayers from a 



124 



mosque) before the hour wantonly, during the month 
of 'Ramadan' (the Islamic month of sanctity and 
fasting). The 'Moozzan' accepted his guilt and promised 
to desist. ' 

You can see its singular significance for yourself 
vis a vis the prohibitions imposed on conjugal 
cohabitation and eating in 'Zikr-e-Ilahi' (the 
rememberance of Allah) according to Holy Faith of the 
Muslims. The examplary illustration of the ugly faced 
woman which will be shown to all on the Day of the 
Judgement has already been related. People will 
exclaim at the sight of her "God forbid! Who is this 
.ghastly creature?" And they will be told "Don't you 
know her? She is the some one that you were so 
enamoured of in the world". It will be a lasting lesson 
for all. 

There is an other anecdote of the same nature. 
A king married his son to a beautiful lady. On the 
night of the honeymoon the bridegroom prince took so 
much wine that he got intoxicated. In this state of 
stupour, instead of reaching his bridal chamber he 
trotted off to a place which was lit up by a lamp. Some 
people appeared to be fast asleep there, who could 
not listen to his calls. Amongst them somebody was 
sleeping covered by a new linen sheet. Thinking that 
she was his bride, he reclined beside her. When he 
uncovered the sheet a fragrant scent of aroma puffed 
up. Now, he became sure that she was his bride and 
started lascividously indulging with her in bridal 
amours. He put his tongue in her mouth. It was wet 
and its moisture was rapturous. He considered it to be 
her simultaneous reciprocation. However, when -he 



125 



came to his. senses in the morning he realized that it 
was actually the tomb-house of Fire-worshippers. The 
people that he had thought were asleep were actually 
the dead, while the lady that he had mistaken to be his 
bride was in fact an old, haggard woman who had just 
been buried. The perfume that he had misconjectured 
to be the scent of some sweet smelling flowers was in 
reality camphor. Thereupon the prince got the start of 
his life. He also noticed that he was polluted all over 
and his mouth had a pungent unsavoury taste. He was 
so ashamed of himself that every fibre of his being was 
cursuig and condemning him for his ghastly conduct. 
How would he face his father, the officers of his armed 
forces and the people, he was asking himself. His 
revolting behaviour was appalling. This is called the fire 
of shame of such treacherous behaviour in the 
Hereafter. 

The third, gross and most palpable folly that the 
man will most vehemently regret will be that he 
remained engrossed in the worldly affairs, its attractions 
and temptations to such a pitch that he forgot the 
hereafter completely. 

The fire of the sufferings of his soul will keep on 
burning perpetually as he will not be able to have the 
most singular blessing of Allah, the most exquisite 
charm of the nearness to His splendour of unparalled 
excellence! What achievement could be greater than 
this? 

He would rue and regret, but to no avail. He 
would realize his mistake too late. The looking glass of 
his soul would not be worth looking at. The mirror of 
his heart would become tarnished and black. 



126 



We can find the example of such a person in 
that of a group of people who go some where in the 
dark and find beautiful sea shells for the picking. 
Others collect as many of them as they can but he 
declines to follow them suit, vainly considering them to 
be dull conches of no value. His friends were sensible 
and discerning but he teased and taunted them all the 
way and called them fools. Came the dawn when he 
realized that, not his colleagues, he himself was a fool 
as he did not follow them suit and lost an invaluable 
treasure of gems. He was now very sorry that his 
friends had become wealthy and he was left to remain 
a pauper, for which he himself was to blame. How 
could he ask them to share their wealth with him? So 
Allah has proclaimed: - 

( o . : J>J£\ J* U*.> 

Pour .on us some water or some of that 
Allah has provided you. They will say, 
Allah has forbidden them to the 
unbelievers. (7 : 50) 

On the contrary they would say 'that you used 
to ridicule and humiliate us. Today is our day. 

'.*''. • »'• ■ >i * , i ' , 

(TA : AjA) 

If you scoff at us, we will also scoff at you 
as you scoff. (11:38) 

This is indeed on instance in point. The man 



127 



who ignores the good and ridicules the good doers 
and has no time or the desire for hate Allah's Marafat 
for which the man has been implicitly sent into this 
world, is himself to blame for the fire that his soul 
burns in consequently. Blessed are those who collect 
the jewels of the God's pleasure and of His 
benevolence in this world and line happily in the 
hereafter. Such people will cry in distress on the Day 
of Judgement that:- 

3, <dJl .pjjj U* y ftUJI ja Li* 1 jjaJ> 

Pour on us some water or some of that 
Allah has provided you. (7 : 50) 

When they will hear this reply they will envy the 
God's good people, for they will see for themselves 
how magnanimously Allah has rewarded them with 
priceless pearls and beautiful gems in lieu of their 
humble obedience to Him. Indeed so Merciful He is 
that the prize of one moment of his Mercy is far far 
greater than the total wealth and treasures of a life 
time in the world. So much so that even the last evil 
door who will be evacuated from hell after all, will, in 
final analysis find himself of ten times more worth than 
he could ever conceive to get in the world for which 
he craved so much. 

These weighments and measurements are of the 
realm of soul and not those of earthly scaling and 
calibration. It is like saying that one pearl is equivalent 
to ten Ashrafis. 

It is worth while repeating in regard to the 



128 



aforementioned three kinds of fire, that such a fire of 
the soul in the hereafter is far more fierce than the 
bodily fire of this world. In the hereafter when the 
effect of the fire does not reach the body, as elucidated 
earlier, the pain, its agony is felt directly by the Man' 
the 'Rooh' most intensely. In other words it is not a 
case of arson as such. No one'from outside or nothing 
external sets the soul on fire. Its flames ablaze from 
within. The pain fek on account of fire has always thus 
been considered the most voilent suffering. In bodily 
fire-burn, the man feels its devastating effect travel fast 
to the other parts of the organism in agony. The man 
struggles and writhes in Its torture. Hence you can well 
imagine its effect on the soul which is one entity. 

The heart is the grand palace of the 'Marafat' of 
Allah. When the suffering be in such an abode, that 
too either for having neglected its Master or on 
account of disobedience to Allah's Commands, how 
cataclysmic the pain the 'Rooh' will suffer one can well 
imagine. 

A cripple or a paralysed person in any limb 
does not feel any pain. In the worldly existence the 
heart of a bad man becomes worthless by his evil 
deeds. But when the man dies the metarmophosis' is 
further altered. The soul, the , Rooh\ the 'Jan' feels the 
fire emerge from within. It does so with great ferocity. 
That is the difference between the good and the evil in 
the world. The good people are the cognizant people. 
They live in fear of God, abstain from the evil and 
dedicate themselves to perpetual pursuit of the 
'Marafat* of Allah. It is actually their heart which strives 
for it indefatigably. Unlike their 'opposites' they have 



129 



the 'Ilm ul Yaqeen' (Absolute belief in Faith). In their 
life time they get to know what the fire of the hereafter 
means. It is written in the Holy Book that:- 



In the 'Shari'iat' i.e. the Faith you will find 
repeated reference to and a recurring emphasis on the 
'Jismani Dozakh' viz the hell of the body, as every one 
knows. So, when in its antithesis you speak of the 
'Roohani Dozakh', to wit, the hell of the 'Rooh', he 
considers it useless, worth no significance, a mere 
nothing and does not pay heed to you, being totally 
unaware of its torturous reality. 

It is like telling a lad "Son, waste your time in 
playful trivialities. This is your age to learn and make 
'something' of yourself or else you will not be able to 
retain or maintain your father's wealth and kingdom, at 
all." Do you think he will listen to you? No! But if you 
stress the right note of the wisdom and say to him 'Son 
if you do not learn your lessons well, your teacher will 
take you to task, pull your ears and perhaps complain 
about you to your father', he will respond to you 
forthwith since he is aware of the veracity of fear. 

In the same manner, the hell of the world is 
also a fact and the greater verity of being deprived of 
His proximity and the 'Marafat of Allah' is also an 




(V© : 



No indeed; had you the knowledge of 
certainty! You shall surely see Hell. 

(102 : 5,6) 



130 



undeniable truth. Hence do not be misled by these 
who assert that the 'Ulema' have only informed us of 
the worldly hell hence all your arguments the hell of 
the soul are a harangue, a jargon, a monotony and 
nothing else.' 

As stated earlier, the answer is simple. They 
know it. These concepts are not akin to them hence 
they do not want to learn them also. The apparent 
reason of their behaviour is that they live in the 
superficial world of 'Mahsoosat' (Sense and sensibilities) 
only. They proclaim to follow the 'Shari'iat'. Strangely, 
they do not conjoin the two together. The 'Rooh' is 
paramount and manifest. Why do they not tend to 
consider it as a branch of the inevitable truth is 
therefore equally astounding, specially when the root 
of both is based in man's observation to this effect. 

They should realized that good deeds, result in 
the purity and the grandeur of the soul. Why should 
such nonconformists fail to acknowledge is beyond 
one's comprehension. One should therefore logically 
learn that the saints, the elite of Allah consider 
themselves in journey through this world. 

Such a person, travelling on this path, trading 
and gathering the good for his profit and discarding the 
trash to forestall loss, is actually carrying the good 
bargains made by him enroute to his final destination 
i.e. the Hereafter. 

He knows that 'From Him have we come and 
unto Him shall we return'. Therefore he remains fully 
alive to his status of being in transit all the time. His 



131 



actual country is not this world. As such proceeds 
along this path collecting the finest merchandise in his 
sojourn at different halting points and milestones, fully 
aware that when he reaches his goal he would fetch a 
fair price for what he has assimilated en route thus far, 
in the country of his permanant residence, the 
hereafter for him. This hereafter was the 'herebefore' 
i.e. the place from where he had started on a 
compaigning journey. 

There are four distinct 'Manzils' i.e. the districts 
of stay in his travels. If seen with some philosophic 
contemplation, each one of them is a sort of world in 
its own. 

(i) The first 'Manzil' is of the 'Alam-e-Mahsoosaat' 
i.e., of the sense and sensibilities. 

(ii) The second 'Manzil' is that of the 'Alam-e- 
Takhayyulaat' i.e., of conception, to go by. 

(iii) The third 'Manzil' is that of 'Mauhoomaat' ie., of 
the discernment of the undiscerned. 

(iv) The fourth 'Manzil' is of the 'Ma'aqoolaat', of the 
good order and achievement. It is in this 'Manzil' 
actually that one gets awareness of self. 

Let us try and understand their status by the 
following examples. 

(I-a) As long as one remains or is in 'Alam-e- 
Mahsoosaat' described above. He is one among 
the many moths. It hovers and hovers around 
the star instinctively. The moth has the eyes but 
does not have the intellect to think and 



132 



remember. The attraction of the moth for the 
star is proverbial for its intrinsic trait to evade 
the darkness and be inflamed with the love of 
the light. As it is not possessed with the power 
of balanced thought and safety, in it's search for 
an exit in the illumination it erroneously 
considers the burning flame to be that opening, 
with the result that it ultimately falls on the 
incandescent flame and dies. If the moth was 
endowed with the capability of reasoning, it 
would not have gone near the flame after the 
first warm glow of it, before singeing its feathers. 
This dearth makes the moth not reach the status 
of any reckoning. 

For instance in contradistinction, other animals 
try to shy away from a thing when they are 
hurt. The very sight of a stick makes them flee 
from danger. 

(Il-a) In the second stage of 'Alam-e-Takhayyalat' the 
man dwells in the realm of the cattle and the 
dull, feeble- minded animals. 

(IH-a) The third realm is of the aforementioned 'Alam- 
e-Mauhoomaat'. At this level he comes at par 
with the goat and the horse, so to say i.e. in 
antithesis to the feeble minded animals of the 
second stage, at this stage he recognises his 
enemies and tries to avert danger by natural 
impulses viz he endeavours to fly for his life the 
moment he casts his eyes on a wolf or a lion, 
although he may not have seen them before. 
Something in him tells him not to dread a 
mighty ox, a camel or a giraffe although they 



133 



are larger in size than them. This instrict is 
engrained in him naturally by Allah. Yet these 
animals are not so intelligent i.e. at that level 
where they may be considered to be competent 
to look after themselves, which comes in the 
fourth stage 

(iv) The fourth stage is of the 'Alam-e-Maqoolaaf. as 
stated earlier. Per factum, till the third stage 
man remains in the domain of obscurity. It is 
actually from here that man enters the status of 
'Alam-e-InsaTiiat' i.e. the realm of glory of man. 
He sees such things in this stage where 
conjecture and superstition are totally 
eliminated. 

In 'Alam-e-Mahsoosaat' the man starts assessing 
and evaluating things in their right perspective avoiding 
the things to come. Here, he sums up the things as he 
sees them. Things have an entity, an identification. He 
tries to classify them correctly and generally succeeds in 
doing so. 

Naturally, in the world of 'Mahsoosaat' i.e., in 
that of the sensations, the man's concentration is based 
on such feelings which are conveyed to him by his 
discerning sensations, like walking on the earth. But at 
the last, the fourth stage, it also implies his capacity to 
be able to do much more than that, like walking on 
the water. This, mind you is the stage of ascendence 
of man, the 'Alam-e-Maaqoolaaf. Here in glaring 
comparison his walking about could be based on the 
verity of facts of a different nature accepted by his soul 
and as such capitalise in his being able to walk on 



134 



water. This Is the eminent status of the prophets and 
the Allah's 'valis', like their taking a walk in the air. 
People asked the Holy Prophet (Allah be pleased with 
him), if Prophet Isa the Holy Christ (peace of Allah be 
upon him) could walk on water? He replied. 

- J §k *3! 'h 

"If his conviction even was firmer, 
he could walk on air." 

It shows that such things are in 'Alam-e-Idrak' 
(Concievable) i.e. not impossible viz possible. Thus 
there are many stages of man's mounting the stairs of 
stature from the first rung to the last rung of eminence 
and acquiring angelic traits which took man to His 
'Meraj' (The pinnacle of glory). There are many 
hazards in this ascent from the lowest strata of the 
'Asfalus Safileen' to the zenith of the 'Aala Illiyeen', as 
is stated in the Holy Qur'an. 

'Jjs JC*Jr, cj'^Li\ J* iiudt uli.'j* u» 

(yt-.^y^) li'j^ u'ji^ 

We offered the trust to the heavens and 
the earth and the mountains, but they 
refused to carry it and were afraid of it; 
man carried it-he was surely tyrant and 
ignorant. (33 : 72) 

There are various stages in the ascent of man 
from the lowest status of the animals and the 'Jamadat' 



135 



to that of the pedestal of angels. This is so, because 
there is no danger in, what is on earth in the 'Jamadat' 
i.e. in the growth and the vegetation etc. They do not 
know. Vice versa the 'Ala Illeyeen' are stationed at the 
height of their glory. It is not possible for them to 
descend from there, as is inscribed in the Holy Book. 

Everyone of us has a known station there. 

(37 : 164) 

The animals are amongst the 'Asfalus Safileen', 
the lowest. Therefore, there is no progress for them. 
However the man in the middle rung is in danger. He 
can sink to the depths of the animals of the lowest 
level. He can also soar high to the heights of the status 
of the .Malaika (Plural of 'Malik' the angels). By the 
term, the *Bar-e-Amanat' i.e. the capability, the 
prowess to shoulder such grave responsibility of being 
the 'Ashraf-ul-Makhlooqaat', the Best amongst all 
creations, is therefore a matter of the essence. It 
implies that only man at his best, in his grand stature 
of being the 'Ashraful Makhlooqaat could accept the 
challenge. 

The meaning and purpose of this treatise is 
therefore to look deeper into things, not merely to 
have a superficial look at what they superficially appear 
to be but to ascertain what they really are. This 
discourse about the purpose of man's journey through 
life is as such, food for thought for those who wish to 
pick up the words of wisdom and concentrate on their, 
intrinsic worth. There are not may works of this nature 



136 



nor many people who may want to or be able to 
comprehend it. Hence the present dialogue on the 
subject should be sufficient. 

There are quite a few people who are neither 
wise nor do they follow the 'Shariat'. Such are the 
people who find themselves in doldrums about the 
state of the 'Akhirat'. Rather they are suspicious about 
it. Actually when the worldly desire takes the better of 
them, it suits their book to rebut the hereafter. They 
do so and make excuses to defend themselves. The 
devil supervenes them with it's black deeds, with all it 

charms and aids and abets them to think that the 
punishment of the Day of the Judgement is just a 
fanciful hallucination created to terrify people. As 
regard the promise of the Paradise to the righteous, 
they also brand it as mere charismatic showmanship, a 
fantasy of mental fanfare evolved to ' put man to * 
hardships of dry, dreary lives and nothing else. 
Therefore they look down upon the followers of the 
Faith (The •Shariyat'). 

Some of them pretend to be above all such 
considerations in a 'Gudri', a rag mat. Such pretentions 
do not help them the least. Nor do they have any 
station of merit. Actually such imposters do themselves 
as much harm as to other simpletons who get beguiled 
by them into evaluating them to be people of some 
estimation status, which they can not understand. In 
reality they have no logic or arguments to support 
them. How can such people have any real concealed 
worth in them? They have nothing up their sleeve. 
Under the circumstances they should be told in no 
uncertain terms that if one lac, twenty four thousand 



137 



prophets, all the sages of the time, all the 'Ulema' and 
'Aulia' were wrong and only they are right, then there 
is nothing more to add to the subject in the light of 
their stupidity and arrogance. 

One may say that may be you were mistaken. 
Hence you could not understand the truth about the 
Hereafter and the «Azab\ the torture of the soul, the 
percept of the 'Rooh' due to the 'Alam-e-Mahsoosat 
i e your sensory perceptions, yet to treat what is not 
known to a person, as wrong on such flimsy ground is 
not tangible. A person with such conceit must be 
diagnosed immediately that he is not at all in his right 
elements specially when he says that 'just as 1 know 
that two are more than one 1 donot have to be told, I 
know fully well that there is no such things as Rooh 
or soul. It has no permanence and physical joy or pain 
can under no circumstances be considered in 
conjunction with the joy or pain of the soul. It k such 
people about whom Allah has said. 

So if thou callest them to the guidance, 
even then they will not be guided ever. 

(18 : 57) 

Suppose he advances the argument that *why 
should I spend the rest of my life in the hovel of piety 
and unnecessarily restrain myself from the joys that the 
world has to offer to me, when I have no dues on 
what you are trying to tell me about the verity of the 
soul and- the hereafter since they look rather far 
fetched to me. In any case I am not aware of these 



138 



matters'. In such a case the answer is that 'now that 
you have accepted this much why do'nt you follow the 
'Shariat'. It is based on logic that when you are not 
aware of a thing, you should not take any risk. 
Suppose you extend your hand to eat out of a plate 
and you are told that a snake has just sniffed it, you 
will immediately withdraw from the meal. This 
statement may be wrong, yet, the prudence in you will 
never make you partake of the food, no matter how 
delicious it may be. Likewise suppose you are sick and 
in fear of your life and the person who writes the 
charms of healing asks you to give him a rupee worth 
of silver, so that he may be able to prepare the amulet 
for you, you will accede to his demand despite your 
apprehensions to the contrary. 

Also if a clairovoyant tells you that when the 
moon reaches such and such stage you should take 
some bitter medicine for your treatment. Inspite of its 
fantasy, you would most likely follow his advice for 
your health, also on the ground that he may be right.' 

So, how can one lac twenty four thousand 
prophets, scores of sages, 'Ulema' and Valis' be wrong 
and just heresay, or a quack or a fortune teller may be 
right? This should induce the man to reconsider his 
position. It is likely that he may get inspired to do so 
on the basis that if these people are right why should I 
deny the hereafter, may be that by not listening to 
them and indulging in worldly pleasures blindly, I may 
be irrevocably blighted in the next world. So why 
should I not stop even now? 



Hypothetical^, if the entire world was to be 



139 



filled to the brim with rye-corn and a sparrow was 
assigned to pick up one rye corn in one thousand 
years, still it is a moot point if the rye corns would 
meet the eternity. So why take the risk of the 
punishment of the hereafter from here to the Day of 
the Judgement, he should think? 

People make voyages in boats and ships and 
suffer hardships to sell their merchandise for their 
subsistence, why should man not do it? Piety grit and 
perseverance in the performance of good deeds will 
definitely pay the perseverer good dividends. 

Hazrat 'All (Allah's Pleasure be on him), once 
told an idolater in a religions* debate that "If what you 
are saying is correct then you are on the wrong and we 
are also on the wrong. And if what we are saying is right 
then according to you, we will be in the wrong but you 
will burn in hell all your life." 

Hazrat 'Ali was a sage. He could not advance 
the argument more powerfully. He said so, not 
because he had any doubt in what he was saying 
(Allah forbid) but he had so forcefully framed the 
premises of his statement in view of the mentality of 
the atheist. 

So we come to the conclusion that a person 
who remains idling his time in the worldly affairs at the 
cost of his 'Aakhirat', his hereafter is in peril In the 
light of the strength of the strong arguments hitherto 
advanced and the examples given, it is appropriate for 
the dissenter to take no risks and be on torra flrma. 



140 



"And peace be on him who follows the 
guidance." 

We have summed up our discourse on the 
'Marafat' of Allah, 'Nafs\ this world and the Hereafter 
Insha Allah henceforth we will talk on other Islamic 
subjects. 



ISLAM AND IT'S ESSENTIAL 
ELEMENTS 

We have already dwelt at some length on the 
following :- 

(i) The 'Marafat' of Allah 

(ii) 'Marafat' of one's own self 
(Hi) The 'Marafat' of the world 

(iv) And the 'Marafat' of the Hereafter. 

The secret of obtaining Allah's happiness and 
His blessings lies in worshipping Him truly and 
sincerely and in His obedience. The man should 
consequently be careful to do the following: - 

A. The man should not only be the most humble 
and obedient servant of Allah and worship Him 
but he should also have the bearing, the 
personality, the good demeanour of a good man. 
His general conduct would as such become 
appealing to others also, besides his own self. 

B. This is as far as, how a person looks. But that is 
not enough. He should also, so behave in society 
that his conduct remains in the bounds of the 
'Shariat'. He would then come to be recognised 
as such. 



141 



142 



C. The aforementioned constitutes his general 
performance that others see. Now we come 
to his soul. As such it is incumbent upon the 
man to protect his heart from the evil and it's 
devastation. 

D. He must not only take care of the above 
mentioned 'do'nt' but also take fall care of its 
'do' i.e. having safeguarded his heart, his soul 
from the evil, he must at the same time 
garnish and adorn it with goodness of virtue. 

Thus, by follwing the 'do'nt of not doing in the 
'Marafat' of the soul which is evil and by persuing the 
'Do' of doing all those things which are good and 
pure, he will be feeding his soul with the food that is 
conducive to its wellbeing. Thus he will be saved from 
the 'Muhlikat' i.e. the fatal effects of the evil and 
fortified by the 'Munjiat' or worthiness of the 
performance, of which his soul would be justly proud. 

These four 'Arkaan', the essential elements are 
as follows: - 

1 PART — THE 'IBADAT, I.E. WORSHIP 

A Mussalman i.e. a person believing in the 
Muslim faith must adhere to the principles and canons 
of faith of the 'Ahle Sunnat wal Jamaat', the accepted 
school of thought. 

So, once a Muslim has uttered the basic 
'Kaiima-e-Tayyaba' i.e. the proclamation of Faith that 



143 



'There Is no Allah but Allah alone and Muhammad 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) Is His Holy 
Prophet* he must fully grasp the strength of what it 
means and dedicate his being to its absolute 
pursuance. The onus of this supreme truth is enough 
for his Faith. It is repeated that the verity lies not only 
in its proclamation but also in understanding it to its 
core and the foundation. The Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) has personally 
emphasised this. 

Since it is a question of the propagation of Faith 
in its true better and spirit, it has been found 
incumbent that there should be a body of refined, 
learned people with the power of imparting knowledge 
to others due to their 'llmul Kalam' capability to 'speak 
on the subject effectively' and remove doubts and 
uncertainties from the minds of the people, lest Allah 
forbid they should be misguided by the mischief 
mongers. In every 'Bastf or dwelling of people such 
persons should form the vanguard of those whose task 
should be to perform this duty. It is also called a 'Farz- 
e-Kifaya' i.e. a duty of being instrumental to do good, 
as applicable. 

Reducing this to a premise, the people in 
general are the 'Awam', the men, who wish to follow 
the faith. In this eventuality, such an orator or the 
'Mutakallim' is like a 'Kotwal* viz the enforcer of the 
law, the discipline. His job is to watch over and 
oversee the matters of Faith. 

However the path of the Truth of the 'Marafat' 
is different. It is difficult. Our discourse on it, in the 



144 



previous chapter despite its having some length is very 
infitesimal. It is a very complex and far-reaching 
subject. The seeker has to be seeking it all the while. 

So, when we are talking of the 'Shariat', we are 
on a differnt ground altogether. Any claims of 'Marafat' 
in such a case can be misleading. One has to see each 
thing in its right perspective. For instance if a sick 
person takes medicine but does not follow the 'Parhez', 
the things forbidden by his physician, his condition is 
likely to deteriorate rather than improve. 

A. SYMPOSIUM. 

So, bear in mind that He is One and Only. He 
is Supreme. He is the Creator of us all and of all that 
is in this universe. He has no parallel. He is the Master 
and we are His servants. Hence, the beauty of man 
lies in his conduct, In how grateful he is to Him. He is 
Immanent. He is not dependent on any thing or any 
one. Every thing is dependent on Him. Nothing came 
into being of its own accord. He is the Superb Creator 
of ail things! How can we possibly endeavour to 
describe Him. We try to do so:- 

(i) By seeing the splendour of his creations. 

(ii) By His 'Ismhai-Husna' i.e. by His beauteous 
Great Names. 

(Hi) By witnessing 'His Qudrat' i.e. His power, His 
prowess. 

(iv) By the status of His favourite men. We can not 
ascribe any dimensions to Him. He is above all 
things. He does what He wills. He is All 



145 



Pervading. He is every where. We are under 
His 'Arsh'. He is above it, yet we can not 
conceive of Him in the shape of any mass or 
volume. His 'Arsh' (The ascendent heights of 
the heavens) is hold by His 'Hamilan-e-Arsh' 
i.e. the 'Arsh bearers'. Allah forbid, we can not 
speak of Him in any negative sense. Still when 
we talk about 'His KamaF viz His grandeur, we 
find ourselves at a loss for words. We just can 
never do so. So Great He is. His 'Marafat' is the 
ultimate aim of life. Man should accordingly 
endeavour and aspire most ardently to see His 
MamaF in His 'KamaP {the excellence), in this 
world. His Glory in the hereafter will be 
manifest and of an equally unique nature. 

B. 'QUDRAT. 

He is not like anything we know of. His 
'Qudrat', His Power, His Prowess is All Encompassing. 
Allah forbid, no weakness of any kind can be attributed 
to His strength. Such is 'His Kamal', (His Excellence) in 
every thing. All the seven layers of the earth and the 
heavens are under His command, so are the 'Arsh' 
and the 'Kursi' (The celestial seat, the Throne in 
Heavens, above) . All His creations are at His beck and 
call. 

C. ILM 



His wisdom is unsurpassed. His 'Ilm', His 
knowledge is selfsufficient. Right from the 'Arshe Aala' 
the lofty heavens to the Taht us Sara' (the farthest 



146 



depths below), there is nothing that He does not know 
of. His knowledge of things Is continuous, concurrent 
and eternal. So much so, that the sands of the deserts, 
the leaves of the trees, the palpitations of the human 
heart's forebodings are all in 'His Ilm' all the time. He 
is ever cognizant of the condition and quantity of each 
variant of every moment. He knows all about the stars, 
constellations and other astral beings at every step. 
Their distances and quantities and those of the particles 
in the prevalent air in the atmosphere are all within his 
scope and knowledge, every instant. 

D. IRADAH 

His will supercedes every thing. Whatever Is in 
this universe, is so, due to His command; whether it is, 
big or small, good or bad, profitable or damaging, 
joyous or grievous, health- bearing or otherwise, His. 
'Mashiaf (His will) is manifest in everything, In toto. If 
the entire genre of men, the genies, Satan and the 
angels get together to stir a particle of anything from a 
place or try to increase or decrease it in the least 
without the Will of the Allah, they would not be able 
to do so. In short, every thing has to bow down before 
Him and seek His Mercy for what It wants. Every thing 
is in His control and subject to His will. 

E. HEARING AND SIGHT 

The way Allah knows every thing, in the same 
manner He can hear and see every thing. There is 
nothing near or distant to Him. Every thing is in this 
grasp. 



147 



Nothing affects Him the least. He will hear the 
sound whether It be near or at far distant reaches of 
the earth. Likewise, tight or pitch darkness does not 
affect His unique powers of observation. We can say 
that He hears the faintest sound of the tread of an ant 
in the deep down regions of the Tahtus Sara' and sees 
the profile and its colours at such distant depths. He 
does not depend on eyes to see or on ears to hear. 
Indeed He is unique and absolutely beyond the 
purview of anyone so that He may in any way, ever 
be able to portray Him. 

F. KALAM* - SPEECH 

His command is His Order. It is to be obeyed in 
toto. His world is Law. Whatever is conveyed by Him 
in any form is a verity Supreme in itself. His promise is 
likewise irrevocable. 

There are various modes of His 'Kalam*. In His 
benign kindness He spoke directly to prophet Moses 
(Moosa) (peace of be upon him). Such talk is not with 
the mouth or the tongue. Similarly Allah's expression is 
like what is in the heart, spoken in wordless, soundless 
speech. His 'Kalam' of even higher order is with us in 
the form of His four Holy Books including the Bible 
and the Holy Qur'an. These Books, some of whom 
are ancient are His 'Kalam', His Testaments and 
Message. Every word of them is sacred. 

The Holy Qur'an is read and recited with the 
tongue of the heart. Each syllable of this Holy 
sacrament is protected by Allah, by His Sublime 
guarantee to this effect. The Holy Qur'an is transcribed 



148 



fct the 'Lauh-e-Mahfooz* (Allah's Record Book). It is 
ordained by Allah. It has been inscribed in this world 
by man's hand, but the man has no hand in its text. It 
is Allah's TCalam'. 

G. BENEFACTION (BENEFICENCE) 

Allah alone could create this universe. If all its 
wise gather together and try to produce even an iota 
of it, leave aside/ to improve anything in it in the 
slightest degree, they will shiver at the magnitude of 
the undertaking and will fail miserably. Anyone who 
can dare to think to the contrary would be like a blind 
person who goes to a well-furnished house, comes a 
purler and upsets some beautifully arranged objects, 
due to his invalidity. Suppose, after that instead of 
conveying his regrets, he snaps back at the inmates of 
the house as to why these things were so placed as to 
come in his way, how would they feel? 

Verily, His acumen of the greatest wisdom, 
enterprise and sagacity is well writ over every article of 
his production. The deftness and expertise evident in 
each and every thing He has created is par excellence. 

Also, Allah is above all partiality and prejudices. 
He does not indict people unfairly. He is pure, just 
and benevolent. He does not cross any barriers of 
fairness because all barriers are within the confines of 
His command. The sufferings, pain, sickness, poverty 
and other predicaments of this kind faced by man are 
not due to any Injustice on His part. One may not be 
able to understand their cause but one thing is certain 
that He is Benefident, Supremely Benign and All 



149 

Powerful. 

H. AAKHIRAT. THE HEREAFTER 

Allah has created this universe. There are two 
'Alams' in it. viz. the 'Alam-e-Jism', the realm of the 
body and the 'Alam-e-Roohani' i.e. the domain of the 
soul, the 'Rooh'. 

The Rooh's heaven is in the Alam-e-Jismani, 
the man's physical domain, so that the man may be 
able to earn the good bargains of his journey through 
life by seeking Allah's 'Marafat' while on his way to the 
final destination i.e. the 'Aakhirat'. The duration of the 
sojourn of every person is preordained. It can not be 
changed. In the final spasms of man's life the "Jan', the 
soul is detached from his body. 

On the Day of Judgement, the 'Jan' of man, 
his soul will again be encased in human form. 
Everyone will be raised up. Each person would then 
see his 'Aamal Nama' i.e. the record book of his 
performance in the world and would be reminded of 
his good and bad deeds done. A unique Scale of 
Justice (Unlike any in this world) would weigh the 
good and the evil right before his eyes. 

I. THE SIRAAT. THE FINAL PASSAGE WAY 

Thereafter every body would be asked to walk 
on the 'Pulsiraat', a passage way which is finer than 
the hair and sharper than the razor edge of a sword, 
and those people who have been treading on the 



150 



straight path of the Allah in this world would not feel 
any difficulty in crossing it. 

On the contrary, those people who have not 
followed the straight path of righteousness in this world 
would not be able to make it, on the 'Pulsiraat' and 
would fall into Hell. The passerby's on this 'Pulstrat' will 
be detained on this bridgeway and asked the detail of 
their deeds. Whereas the fortunate will feel very 
happy, their faces glowing with pride, the 'Gunahgars', 
the evil doer's faces would be haggard. They will feel 
frightfully humiliated. 

There would also be some groups of people 
who would likewise look happy. The pious and 
obedient servants of Allah would be entered into 
Paradise while the miscreants would find their abode in 
Hell. The prophets and the elite of Allah would be 
seen doing 'Shafaat' (Pleading the case of people on 
extenuating grounds). The 'Arhamur Rahimeen', the 
Most Merciful will magnanimously pardon them. The 
Others would go to Hell. All such defaulters will serve 
their term according to the magnitude of their offences. 
Then they would also be sent to Paradise. 

J. THE PROPHET 

The Allah has proclaimed that there are some 
such heinous offences, some such grievous crimes and 
evil deeds which would be the cause of their 
perpetrator to be condemned and severely punished. 
Likewise some deeds would be so virtuous in them 
that they would be the source of a man being 



151 



rewarded. Since such acts were not known, Allah in 
His Sublime" Mercy created and ordained His propehts 
to go to the world and educate the people thoroughly, 
so that they may not be able to say At a later stage that 
they were not informed. This was done concurrently to 
forestall any lack or misgiving of any nature. Finally, in 
His Benign compassion for the mankind, Allah sent the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be upon 
him), His last and the most Esteemed Messenger to the 
world to culminate His Beneficence on this servants. 
He is therefore called the 'Khatimal Aubia' i.e. the last 
and the most lofty of His prophets. All 'Gins' i.e. the 
genies and men were instructed to obey Him and 
follow in His foot steps in all walks of Ufe and His 
friends and companions were accorded a higher status, 
to those of other 'Nabis' and prophets. 

PART-II. THE PURSUIT OF 'ILM': EDUCATION 

"Seeking of knowledge is the duty of 
every Muslim, male and female." 

There is a difference of opinion amongst the 
Ulema about the 'Urn', the knowledge which is meant 
to be obtained viz:- 

(i) According to the 'Mutakaltimeen' i.e. the wise, 
the sages, who are discerning and guide people 
by their 'Kalam' (the discourse) about the real 
substance of things, by the acquisition of the 
'Ilm' is meant the 'Marafat' of Allah. 

(11) The 'Fuqahah' (Plural of 'Faqih', the master of 



152 



'Ilm-ul-Fiqah' the knowledge of the code of 
jurisprudence of Islamic conduct), By this 'Ilm', 
the study of Fiqah is stressed at to enable man 
to be able to differentiate between the 'Halal* 
and the 'Harem' viz that which is valid and 
permissible vis a vis it's contrary. 

(iii) According to the school of thought of the 
people who believe in 'Tafseer-e-Qur'an', i.e. 
the exposition of the Qur'anic verses and in the 
pursuance of the Hadith, called the 'Muhaddis', 
such an 'Ilm' is meant to be acquired. 

(iv) However, according to the 'Soofi's, the 
education meant to be acquired is that of the 
'heart', the soul, the 'Nafs' which is the 
paramount gem bestowed by Allah to man and 
in it are hidden all the treasures of this world 
and the hereafter. They plead that it is the heart 
in which the passage to Allah is open to man. 

The right of opinion of the exponents of these 
varying thoughts granted, we should not forget that in 
such divergent opinions, no particular 'Ilm' can be 
considered to supercede others nor any particular 'Ilm' 
has been made ('Fare') as such (i.e. Incumbent): 
otherwise there would have been no controversy of 
views, to begin with. Hence, let us analyses the matter 
threadbear and sift the evidence. 

For instance, if a 'Kafir' or an atheist and 
idolater embrace the Faith an early morning or If a 
youngster attains adulthood, come a day, the learning 
of all the *Uloom* (Plural of 'Ilm') is not necessary for 



153 



them. They must utter the 'Kalama-e-Tayyaba' 
(Aforementioned) and genuinely and faithfully learn it's 
meanings and believe in it. They do not have to go to 
the deep 'Dalayal' (details and arguments) on the 
subject. They have just to follow the beliefs of the 
'Ahle-Sunnat wal Jamat' (already described). Of 
course, as an essential conjunct to it i.e. of saying 'La 
Ha Ha lllullah, Muhammad (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) Rasoolullah' either one of them 
should have firm faith and conviction of a staunch 
adherent in the Allah, His Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him), 'Aakhirat', Paradise 
and Hell and its corollaries of the Day of Judgement. 
They should know of the greatness of Allah, His 
Supreme Power and qualities and that He selected and 
sent his ordained prophets for the education and 
betterment of mankind. As such they know that an ill 
doer would be punished and a virtuous person would 
be rewarded. 

Subsequently the learning of the two kinds of 
'Uloom', the knowledge will become vital for them, 
one pertaining to the heart and the other to the body. 
Having established this, they will have to concentrate 
on Its two aspects viz: 

(i) Those things that can be done 

(ii) Those things that can not be done. 

For Instance, a person who is a novice, a new 
comer to the Faith will only have to know the 
following to begin with:- 

A. When the time of the *Zuhr' (The afternoon) 



154 



prayers comes, he should know the requisite 
abolutions and the Tare' (compulsory) prayers 
only. The 'Sunnat' prayers (Prayers in 
emulation of the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) will not be 'Fare' 
or essential for him. 

B. Likewise, when the time of 'Maghrib' (Evening) 
Prayers arrives, he will only have to know that 
there are there Tare' Rakaats (Prescribed 
Salutations) in it. 

C. When the holy month of the 'Ramadhan' (The 
month of stipulated fasting) comes, such a 
beginner will have to know the following only. 

(i) The stipulation of essential fasting during the 
month of 'Ramadan*. 

(ii) The compulsory intention or resolution to fast, 
before starting fasting. 

(iii) That during the sanctified period of fasting a 
person cannot conjugate with his or her spouse. 

(iv) Also, he should know the basics of 'Zakat' 
(Stipulated Payment of two and half percent of 
one's earnings and assets and commodity wise 
donation In the name of Allah, in charity to the 
poor and the deserving). 

(v) Just as the 'Zakaf is calculable on per annum 
basis, the duration of *Haj* is also a year. He 
should also have a good idea about the 
pilgrimage for 4 Haf' (Stipulated pilgrimage for 
every Muslim to go to Baitullah Sharif, The 
House of Allah, if he can afford it). 



155 



Similarly, when a man docs a thing he should 
know it. For instance :- 

A. (i) At the time of Nikah (Conjugal unification rite) 

one should know of its implications. 

(ii) For instance, the person should be aware that 
the conjugation of the husband and wife during 
the period of menstruation of the female spouse 
is obviously forbidden. 

B. The man should be aware of the important 
aspects of his vocation and trade. He should be 
aware of the 'Sood and Bai' (The mortgage), 
the usury (Sood) is forbidden in Islam but 
simple mortgage of goods is allowed under 
specified conditions. For example a barber 
should know what hair can be removed in the 
general context of the knowledge of his trade. 
Likewise, a dentist should know his profession 
well. He should not, accordingly cause 
unnecessary pain to his already suffering 
patient. The removal of a wrong tooth, as one 
can appreciate, would be a blunder of the worst 
order. The same principle applies to a 
physician. He should be well versed in his job. 
For example he should know to apply the right 
ointment on a wound. It is nevertheless not 
necessary for a tailor to know the job of a hair 
dresser or vice versa. 

While these *dos' are Important, so are the 
'donts'. viz:- 

(i) For instance, a person who has to, due to some 



156 



unavoidable reasons, in the proximity of people 
who drink and eat ham and pork such a person 
has to be forewarned against them, specially by 
the 'Ulema'. The 'HalaF (Permissible) and 
'Haram* (no| permissible) has got to be clearly 
defined and segregated. 

(ii) Similarly, that person who mixes freely with the 
members of the opposite sex has got to be 
notified of the stipulations and the significance 
of the 'Mahram' and 'Na Mahram' (i.e. the 
person or persons with whom association is 
permitted by the religion and vice versa). 

(iii) Likewise, the onus of knowing the truth about 
the valid behaviour towards his wife vis a vis her 
periods of menstruation when he is 
contemplating to divorce her, lies on the man 
and not on the woman. 

Now, coming to the realm of the heart We 
have already discussed the matter in some detail. 
However two elementary but important things about it 
should not be overlooked. 

(0 It is necessary for man to know that spite, 
jealousy, arrogance, anger, hatred, treachery 
and baseless suspicions etc. are evil traits. 
Hence they are 'Harem' (not allowed) in Islam. 
Under the circumstances, weak as man is, It is 
all the more necessary for him to be 
continuously on the guard against them. 

(«) A genuine problem can arise, viz man can 
become confused and doubtful on some point 
of faith. In such case he has to see that he does 



157 

not unnecessarily get into a dilemma about that 
thing which is already accepted in Islam in its 
basic Ideology. The question of proper enquiry 
and research will only arise when the problem is 
genuine and germane. That is why the Holy • 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) has all along laid great stress on acquiring 
knowledge, the 'Ilm'. 

Now the question arises of infringing the basic 
stipulations unintentionally, as is sometimes stated by 
some defaulters as a lame excuse. Their folly does not 
come under the purview of inadvertence as can be 
seen by the following examples. 

(i) When a man has physical intimacy with his wife 
before she has taken a bath, often 
menstruation . 

(ii) That a woman who has not had any menses 
says her morning prayers but in anticipation 
does not say her later prayers, say, those of the 
Maghrib and the Isha (Evening and Night prayer 
times) . 

(iii) That a man divorces his wife without caring 
about the status of her menstruation. Such, so 
called lack of knowledge or Ilm is 
unpardonable. 

It is therefore of the essence to acquire 'Ilm', 
since it has innumerable virtues. Knowledge is its own 
reward. It is far far superior to managing to get some 
know how of some vocation, just to be able to earn a 
living by adopting it, out of it's many redeeming 



158 

features, the following four are specially note worthy. 



'Ilm\ the learning, the education or knowledge 
stands in good stead to the person of wealth 
equally as much as it does to a pauper. 'Ilm' 
would benefit ,B fortunate person who has 
acquired inheritance by giving him suitable 
insight into, how th protect it and unable best 
use of it. It will be a source, of honour for him. 
In antithesis, if a person is not rich but has the 
qualification of contentedness and knows how 
to live a simple life of a 'Darvesh' (in this sense 
a contented rr an who can live on the barest 
minimum) and is a good Muslim, 'Ilm' would 
give him grace in this world and in the 
hereafter. 

The third category is that of that man who lives 
from hand to mouth but has a marked self- 
respect. Such a man would, in dire emergency, 
subsist by refering to the 'Baitul Mai' (The 
treasury for the aid of the needy) rather than 
extend his hand for alms before anyone, 
specially before a cruel king. 'Ilm* will guide his 
path to live without blemish. 



Vice versa, the fourth type is that of a miscreant 
who wants to attain some sort of knowledge only to 
attain the world, but does not get anything except a 
daily pittance from the evenly usurped proceeds of the 
'Shahi Khazana' (The royal treasury) and is still not 
able to keep the wolf out of the door, he had better 
get on to earning his livelihood by adopting some craft, 
otherwise he will become a devil incarnate. Such are 



159 



the people who consider it expedient to earn 'Rizq-e- 
Haram' (Illegitimate, immoral livelihood) and spread 
the rot around them. The illitrate and the easy coiness 
of money will follow him suit, lose all surpluses and go 
to the dogs. Fever the such rogues, the better it is for 
all. 

The lasting lesson to learn from it is that for the 
worldly good only the worldly means should be 
adopted. To exploit the people for worldly benefits in 
the name of the 'Deen', the Faith is tantamount to 
blasphemy. To defile a gem with such dirt and the 
state that 'Ilm' will vetinately guide us to the good like 
the earlier people said, is a criminal act. 

"We did not acquire 'Ilm' for Allah but 
it took us towards Him." 

Then the answer was given that the 'Ilm' which 
took the faithful to the path of righteousness i.e. to 
Him was the 'Ilm' of the Holy Book, the 'Sunnah' (the 
hereafter. It's earning was in their hearts. They 
followed their., pious elders who shunned the wordly 
greed. It was under the circumstances that they hoped 
that Allah the Merciful would lead them to Him, His 
path of wisdom and blessings. Allah blessed them and 
they never went near such teachers thereafter, who 
were busy misleading innocent people by their alluring 
baiting-nets. 

"A news is not like an observation." 



160 



Indeed there is a world of difference between 
the worthy sages of the olden days, pure and exalted 
in their attainments as against the hypocrites of the 
present times. For them their unflinching faith was a 
shield against all ensnaring evils. They resolved not to 
be tempted by the world and the worldly 
enchantments and were rewarded. Surely, a mere 
lamp has no comparison to a luminous star. 

Mind you, these good people were not 'Ulema- 
e-Din' (The learned in faith) but they were steadfast 
men who followed the faith sincerely, were pure as 
snow, unassuming, simple and thereby far far away 
from vice and the vicious. Arrogance and the 
treacheries of the world were a taboo to them. 

If a person learns such an 'Ilm', acquires such 
knowledge which keeps him away from the evil and 
makes him do good deeds, what else can be better 
than that! 

Such knowledge is like water from the cooling 
streams for the thirsty and a treatment for the sick. The 
more one attains such knowledge the better it is for 
him. 

PART- III. CLEANLINESS AND PURITY 

Allah has ordained :- 

0" 'C't,' ' - ft * 

(Y Y T : 3 jiJl) " ' " 

Allah loves those who turn to Him and 
loves those who cleanse themselves. 

(2 : 222) 



161 



And the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) has said:- 

"Cleanliness is half of the Faith." 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has further added : - 

"The basis of Religion is the Cleanliness." 

It does not follow thereby that the Taharat' i.e. 
cleanliness .and purity pertains only to the body and 
the clothes. The Taharat can be classified as under:- 

(* > : ftaW) W^'S'JPW Jl 

Say, 'Allah.' then leave them alone, 
playing in their vain discourse. (6 : 91) 

(i) The first essential accordingly is to cleanse the 
'Batin' of v everything except that of Allah. It 
implies that the heart will become really clean 
only when all else except Allah, is expunged 
from it. This, infact, is the genesis of 'Laila Ha II 
Lullah' i.e of the divine dictum that There is no 
god but Allah'. Hence to be pure in body and 
the apparel is of secondary importance. The 
'Siddiqeen' (The Staunch and the True) are of 
this status. Though unequal, the two parts of 
the body and the soul have got to be 



162 



intermerged in this way. 

(ii) The second position lies in cleaning the heart of 
the 'Akhlaq-e-Razela' i.e. the mean and shallow 
things like jealousy, duplicity, greed, enmity and ' 
arrogance etc so that such evil traits are 
replaced by their counterparts viz those of a 
pleasant and welcome demeanour, 
contentment, repentance, patience, fear of 
Allah, forbearance and love. This is 
achievement of great merit. 

(Hi) The third status comprises getting rid of such 
contemptible trends as those of backbiting, 
falsehood, illegitimate and immoral livelihood, 
treachery and of mixing freely with the 'Na 
Mahrams' (those of opposite sex not permitted 
by Faith), from the heart. 

(iv) The fourth stage is that of keeping the body and 
the clothes dean so that the man is further 
adorned by the salutations of bowing before 
Him and lying prostate is object humility before 
Him, in worship and prayers. This is the status 
of a normal Muslim. As such, 'Namaz' (Muslim's 
prayer), is the difference between a believer and 
a 'Kafir' an idolater and an atheist. This 
cleanliness is also in it self 'Half of Eeman' i.e. 
half of faith. As such, since cleanliness of this 
nature is the first half of the faith of a Muslim, 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said:- 

"The basis of Religion is the Cleanliness." 



163 

Although the cleanliness of the body and of the 
clothes is of the last rung, it is not surprising that 
everybody lays stress on it on account of the following 
reasons:- 

A. It is the easiest of all 

B. It pleases the 'Nafs' i.e. the inner ego of 
man. 

C. If gives a general sense of well-being to the 
body. 

D. Such a person bids fare to be a man of 
piety. 

E. It attracts people towards him etc. 

On the contrary the evil. 'Nafs' of the r.;an is 
not pleased when a man's 'Batin' or soul is cleansed of 
all wordly dirt. The purpose of such a man who keeps 
his inner self, the soul clean does not attract people as 
such, because such a performance remains known to 
Allah only. 

Nevertheless, though the superficial cleanliness 
is of the lowest order, as described, it is of so mean 
importance, provided its code of conduct is adhered 
to. 

1) There should be no pretentions of display 
in it 

2) It should not give a feeling of arrogance. 

3) So lavish expenditure should be involved in 
it. 

Otherwise such cleanliness and good 
presentability will become 'Makrooh' (undesirable) . The 



164 



habit of the Soffis (Faithful, distinguished Muslims who 
lead a simple life of few wants) to keep their heads 
covered is in the same order. They are also rather 
particular that their utensils remain clean and generally 
do not allow others to use it. Their 'Lota' (used for 
keeping water) is symbolic to this effect. They take care 
that their drinking water and the water for their 
abolutions is clean. 

(1) In it's care time should not be wasted 
unnecessarily. This is proved by the conduct of 
the Sahaba-e-Karam (Holy - Prophet's 
companions) who remained neat and clean but 
were very practical and did not allow the 
maintenance of personal cleanliness to be at the 
cost of their multifarious assignments. They 
were so pragmatic and down to earth, that 
when the situation demanded they used to walk 
bare-footed. They used to sit down on the 
ground and say their prayers there 
unhesitatingly. In short, they had become so 
hardy that in their rigours and undertakings they 
had got so used to it that the perspiration of a 
camel was no extraraneous substance to them. 
Nevertheless, they were very particular to keep 
their souls clean, as is evident from their 
meritorious lives. 

(2) Piety, as already stated should not dwell on 
pride. When neat, welldressed and good 
looking, there is a certain type of shallow 
person who is likely to become unduly prim and 
boastful of his piety and utter vainly This is how 
I maintain my piety.' He had better lower his 
feet and come down to earth. In it lies his 



165 



betterment. False pretentions are devilish. It 
would do him good if he walked bare-footed on 
earth and said his prayers there. The followers 
of the 'Sunna' are careful people. He should 
likewise take care of himself and desist from 
such behaviour. 

The pragnatism and being practical was inbuilt 
in the 'Sahabae Karim' (The companions of the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him). Hazrat Umar (Allah be pleased with 
him) once used the clean water from the clean 
urn of a Budh lady. In the some way, it is sated 
that the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) used a clean utensil of a 
'Mushrik', an idolater. They were so realistic. 
The Sahaba were not finicky. They never 
hesitated to say their prayers on clean ground. 
In a battle, the soldier had to sleep on the bare 
earth at night. Cleanliness is Godliness but to 
muffle the vagrant 'Nafas' in man is also and 
pleasant feeling of happiness. 

Care in tidiness is good but not at the cost of 
better and nobler things. For instance your 
devoted servant who respects you, hears some 
good news about you, gets overwhelmed with 
delight and dashes up and embraces you, at 
that time, you should not detract yourself from 
him, nor care that he is sweating profusely. You 
should not bruise his feelings. In Islam such an 
act would be contemptuous anY 'Harem' (Not 
permissible). On the contrary love of your fellow 
human beings is far superior to all such 
mundane considerations. That is why if some 



166 



one wishes, to utilise your 'lota' (water pitcher) 
for abolutions; or wants to use your utensil to 
drink water or for that matter wishes to use 
your prayer-mat for saying his prayers, he 
should not be cut to the quick by declining to 
allow him to do so, for the sake of your own 
tidiness. Once the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) asked for 'Abe- 
Zam Zam' (the holy water from Baltul Haram, - 
Makkha). Hazrat Abbas (Allah be pleased with 
him) was standing close by to Him. He humbly 
said "Kindly allow me to use a new utensil to 
extract the water from the well as this one is 
used by may people." The Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) however 
insisted that the same 'Doal' i.e. the same 
utensil may be used which others handled, 
adding (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) "I like the touch of my brother Muslims." 

There is a lesson for us all, in this. The Holy 
Prophet's (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) companions also behaved in the same 
manner to nip the evil of arrogance of this kind, 
in the bud as it is fatal. 

Such an arrogant man not only shows off in 
such manner but also declines to use the things 
of his brother Muslim although they may be 
cleaner than him. So much so that he even 
refuses to say his prayers on the prayer-mat of 
an other person. He looks down up on them. 
He puts on false airs, becomes austere, taciturn 
and pompously declines to have meals with his 



167 



fellow bretheren when they honourably invite 
them to do so. Such behaviour is clumsy, vain 
and unacceptible in Islam. 
(6) Lastly man should not amalgamate the positive 
with the negative i.e. not Intermingle the 
unpermissible with the permissible, in this so 
called (care) about his cleanliness and piety. 

(i) He should not waste time unnecessarily and 
make others wait for him while he is making his 
ablutions by taking a bath. 

(ii) He should not extend his prayer-mat in a 
mosque such a manner that the prayer mat of 
another person may not touch his. There are 
three forbidden things in it. 

(a) He has thus usurped extra space of the 
mosque. He was entitled only limited space for 
his own prayers only. 

(b) It shows his hatred for his fellow brother as if he 
was a dog or some despicable thing. 

(c) He has disrupted the unity of the row of 
prayers. Such 'Munkarats' (negative and invalid 
things) sow the seeds of differences and disunity 
in fellow Muslims. Such behaviour is dreadful. 

Not that you know that the eternal cleanliness 
and external cleanliness are different to each other, let 
us analyse them. The external cleanliness has three 
major factors:- 



168 



All animals are 'Pak* except the dog, the pig 
and the dead animal. 

The fish, locusts etc are also 'Pax'. 

All those animated beings which do not possess 
coursing blood in their bodies like flies, 
mosquitoes, bacteria particularly of the food are 
'Napak' are contaminated. 

;So are all those insects and things which wolve 
and dirt, specially of the kind which 
metamorphism In the inner parts of animals. 

But the things of the kind of genetic sperm like 
the egg of a hen, silk worm etc are 'Pak'. 

One can not say his prayers in sweat or in tears. 
Some exeptions are however allowed in the 
emergent and extenuating conditions, such as:- 

(0 The unavoidable dust on the road. 
(However the dirt, filth and polluted mire is 
not acceptible) 

(«) The small particles of earth in the socks. 

(iii) The slight tendency of the reddish 
extrusion to ooze out of man's body from 
certain affected pores and pimples or 
rashes. 

One can say his prayers with them. 

If one has any doubt about the cleanliness of a 
place, it should first be washed and cleaned 
before saving one's prayers there. 



169 



Water is dean In Itself. It Is also a cleansing 
agent. However its exceptions are as follows: - 

(A) The water with which *Wuzoo' (ablutions before 
prayers etc) has been performed, though 
uncontaminated will not remain reusable. 

(B) The water with which any unclean thing is 
cleaned will not remain 'Pak\ 

(C) The water In which any contaminated matter 
may be present can not be considered free from 
being 'Napak' unless it is more than two 
hundred and fifty maunds. 

II. If one has to extrude excreta:- 

a) Should a person be in a desert he should hide 
himself from the eyes of the others by taking cover as 
best as he can. He should not face the sun or 'Khanai 
Kaaba' (The House of Allah, in Makkah). He should 
not extrude excreta of either form in water, under a 
fruit laden or normal tree. He should also not do so in 
a hole, nor should he use any hard surface for such 
purposes, nor should he likewise do so in the general 
direction of the breeze. Before sitting with such an 
intention he should first place his left foot on the 
ground and keep stress on it. After relieving himself he 
should first left his right leg and then get up. He 
should carry no sacred thing with him in such a state. 
Before going to a place for such relief he should utter 
the following:- 



170 



- j^r> ^JsJlt ^> ^ Jj u i^T 

"I seek refuge with Allah from the impure, 
unclean, dirty, Satan, the out cast." 

When he should come away from this state, he 
should similarly say:- 

"All praise is for Allah who removed from 
me that which caused me in convenience 
and allowed to remain in my body that 
caused me benefit." 

For 'Astanja' (Dry, cleaning man's concealed 
parts of excrement) three stones of adequate size or if 
need be two more should be used. Earthern clods 
in odd numbers can also be used to properly cleanse 
the spot indicated with left hand, in such a way that all 
impurity is removed. This is in case water is not 
available. 

It is better to use both the clods and water. But 
if ample water is available then water should be poured 
by the right hand and dirty spot thoroughly washed by 
the left. Water should be so carefully utilised that it 
does not fall on the clothes. After that the hands 
should be fully rinsed and cleaned. A clean smell of 
the hands will tell that there is -no impurity or bad 
odour left. 



171 



«0 Allah! Purify my heart from hypocrisy 
and safeguard my private parts from 
obscenity." 

««Wuzzoo" (washing of, cleaning of the hands, 
feet, face, forehead, face, the hair, the back of the 
head and face and teeth etc.) should be performed 
after the aforementioned 4 Astanja\ as under. 

(i) First the teeth should be cleaned by a 'Miswak' 
(a wooden tooth brush) or tooth brush. It should be 
applied on the upper right hand teeth to begin with 
then on lower right hand teeth. After that the left 
upper and lower teeth should be brushed. 

Subsequently the inner portion of the teeth 
should be brushed in the same order. Thereafter the 
tongue, gullet and the inner part of the throat shou d 
be properly washed and rinsed. After this too h 
brushing, throat cleaning and 'Miswak', the man should 
sit on a raised place or platform, face the Qibla (The 
Baitullah - The House of Allah in Makkah-e- 
Mukarrama) and utter the following thrice Even before 
going to sleep man should not remain without cleaning 
his teeth and mouth to do away bad odour from his 
mouth. 

. ^ c/> # - ^> ^ r< 



172 



"In the Name of Allah, the Merciful, the 
All-merciful. My Lord, I take refuge in thee 
from the evil suggestions of the devils, and 
I take refuge in thee, my Lord, lest they 
attend me." 

After 'Miswak' i n «Wuzzoo\ man should wash 
both his hands thrice and say:- 

"O Allah! I ask Thee for the blessing and 
the flourishment and I seek refuge from 
bad omen and destruction." 

At the time of «Wuzzoo' he should have the 
intention of 'Wuzzoo before Namaz', (Ablutions before 
prayers of being able to say his prayers in absolute 
cleanliness in his 'Nam**'). After that he should rinse 
his mouth and teeth with water and gargle thrice 
and say the following:- 

(However gargling is forbidden during the 
Ramadan, the month of fasting) 

■ • 

"O Allah! Help me in Thy rememberance 
and Thy thanks-giving and the recitation 
of Thy Book." 



173 



Then he should clean his nose with water, 
thoroughly thrice. Water should go right up the nose. 
However if the person should be fasting, then it should 
not be done. He should then utter *lhese words while 
doing so. 

"O Allah! Bless me with the fragrance of 
Paradise and that Thou be pleased with 
me. 

Then he should wash his face thrice and say. 

"O Allah! Whiten my face with Thy Light 
on the Day when faces of Thy Protected 
Friends will be white luminous." 

The face should be washed with care. Water 
should reach the base roots of hair on his face. The 
beard should also be combed with the fingers of the right 
hand. The ears should also be washed and cleaned, 
particularly the backside and the lope of the ears. The 
eyes should also be washed and cleaned in such a way 
that the traces of the eye-rouge if any may be removed. 
Then comes the turn of the right arm. It should be 
washed from the finger tips to the elbow. While ding so 
he should say. 

■ W 'J*^ 'J* #ji 

"O Allah! Give me my Deed Sheet in my 



174 



right hand and bless me with an easy 
accountability." 

After that he should similarly wash his left hand 
up to the elbows and utter 'these words. 

- '*J& 

"O Allah! I seek refuge with Thee that I be 
given my deed sheet is my left hand or 
from behind my back." 

Then he should wet his fingers, particularly" the 
two near the thumbs and comb them back from 
the forehead to the nape of the head at the back in 
such a way that all the hair of head may become 
moistened. He should repeat this process thrice and 
utter these words. 

"O Allah! Cover me with Thy Mercy and 
send on me Thy blessings and grant me to 
stay under Thy Shadow on the Day when 
there shall be no shadow except Thy 
Shadow." 

Then the man should clean his ears, thrice, the 
fingers and the thumb scrubbing the backside and 'the 
inside lobe of ears and should say. 



175 



"O Allah! Make me of those who listen to 
word La ilaha Illallahu and follow the best 
thereof." 

After that comes the turn of the back of the 
head. He should likewise clean it with his wet thumb 
and fingers of the right hand and utter these words. 

"O Allah release my neck from the Fire 
and I seek refuge with Thee from the 
chains and the fetters." 

After that he should wash his right foot up 
to the ankles thrice scrubbing the inner portion 
between the finger loops with the short and the 
adjoining fingers of the left hand. Then he should say 
these words. 

"O Allah! Establish firmly my feet on the 
Bridge on the Day when feets will be 
shaken (trembled) falling in to the Fire." 

After that he should repeat the process thus and 
wash his left foot up to the ankle and say 



176 



"O Allah I seek refuge with Thee (from it) 
that my feet may slip on the Bridge on the 
Day when feet of the hypocrites will slip" 

Subsequently, after having performed his 

Wuzzoo* (ablutions before prayers) he should utter 
these words. 

a a i&j iiji iii ;h j bi 'x&\ 

J crrf'ja 1 J? (j^wrl (HA!' I>Um Ol 

tt I bear testimony that there is no god 
save Allah, the Only the One, there is no 
partner along with him , and I bear 
testimony that Hazrat Muhammad (peace 
and blessing of Allah be upon him) is His 
Servant and His Messenger. O Allah! 
Make me of the Repentants and make me 
of those who purify themselves and make 
me of those who are Thy righteous 
servants." 

Naturally, a person who does not know Arabic 
should learn their meaning so that he may know what 
he is saying. It is stated in the 'Hadith Sharif (Sayings 
of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) that a person who utters these words, the 
sins and the indiscretions of the relevant portions of 
his body are absolved due to his continuous prayer 
and repentance to this effect. 

A person may be in the state of 'Wuzzoo'. It is 
still better that if he performs it afresh, if he has time 



177 



before the prayers, as, it is stated in the 'Hadith' that a 
person who does so, in a way reinvego rates his 'Ham' 
(His faith) . However the actual strength that he should 
bear in mind is that he should think all along that the 
'Wuzzoo' "I am performing is nothing but superficial 
cleaning of the outer body, oh, Allah have mercy on 
me and clean my 'Batin', my soul also." For, the outer 
cleanliness of the body is for the 'Makhooq' I.e. the 
people, whereas the cleanliness of the heart, the soul is 
for Allah. If the Allah is pleased everything on Allah's 
earth is pleasant. So, the heart is to be looked after 
and immersed in piety and the love of Allah. For 
instance, it is of no use to clean the outer door spick 
and span when the king is invited to the house and 
not clean the inner house properly, worthy of his staus 
and honour,. 

Six things are however 'Makrooh' (consider not 
good), viz the following while performing 'Wuzzoo'. 

(i) To talk of worldly affairs. 

(ii) To scrub the face hard. 

(iii) To wring the hands (and splash water) . 

(iv) To perform 'Wuzoo' with sun-hot water. 

(v) To waste water. 

(vi) To waste the relevant parts for more than three 
times, as prescribed. 

It has been observed that if a man does not 
wipe his face after 'Wuzzoo', he gets a pleasant feeling 
after the breeze plays across his forehead. Moreover, 
to perform 'Wuzzoo' with earthen ware is always 
better, as it creates humility in man. Allah likes it. 

Now, we come to the subject of 'Ghusl' viz how 



178 



to take bath. Apart from the normal human need to 
take bath, it becomes absolutely necessary, soon after 
one has had night-wetness or conjugation with his 
spouse. 

(i) The first basic essential is the intention to 
cleanse one's self thoroughly and to at the same 
time pray of the piety of the heart, too. It is 
called 'Niyyat-e-Sadiqa' i.e. the good intention. 

(ii) It is 'Sunnat' (in accordance with the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) to say 'Bismillah' i.e. 'In the Name of Allah 
the Merciful' and wash the hands first. (These 
words should be uttered without sound). Then 
ajl the impurities of the body should be carefully 
removed and thoroughly cleaned. This done, 
the entire procedure of the 'Wuzzoo' should be 
repeated. 'Special care should be taken to do 
the following: - 

(a) To make sure that every pose of the hair of the 
head and body has been properly cleaned. 

(b) After washing the body clean and before the 
'Wuzzoo' water is poured thrice on the right side 
(including the head and the middle portion) and 
thrice on the left side of the body. The hand 
should not touch, the 'delicate' parts of the 
body at final stages. 

(c) One should not sing or yodel while bathing. 

"Tayyamum". (To perform 'Wuzzoo' without 
water, when it may not be available). It can be 
perfromed under the following extenuating 
circumstances. 



179 



(i) When water is not available, 
(il) When there is very little water. 

(iii) Water available is the restricted property of 
some one who is not available. 

(iv) If the owner of the water is available but is 
selling it at an exhorbitant price. 

(v) When a person is so wounded or sick that he is 
not allowed to use water. 

The procedure is that under the circumstances 
he should locate 'Pak Mitti' clean earth. When the time 
of prayer comes he should perform Tayyamum' as 
under :- 

A. He should rub his hands on it and perform the 
entire ritual of the 'Wuzzoo' described earlier. 

B. He can perform only one 'Farz and Sunnat 
prayer's (as described before) with it. 

III. The third form of cleanliness comes under the 
head of the general cleanliness of the man's body. It is 
of two kinds, viz. 

(i) Even normally but specially in one's travels and 
journey's from one place to an other small dust 
particles are likely to get enconsed on the face 
and in the hair. It is therefore advisable to carry 
a handkerchief and a comb for such 
eventualities. It is stated that the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
used to carry a comb with him. Hence to do so 
is his 'Sunnat'. 

(ii) Similarly, it is in fitness of things to do the 



180 



following:- 

A. The dust particles in the eyes. 

B. The dust particles in the ears. 

C. The dust and food particles in the teeth. 

D. The dust particles in the loops of the 
thumb and fingers of the hands and feet. 

E. The dust particles in the nails of the thumb 
and fingers of the hands and feet should be 
removed and cleaned specially at the time 
of performing the 'Wuzzoo'. It is 'Sunnat' 
i.e. (In pursuance of the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him). 

If a man goes to a 'Hammam" (public bathing 
place, specially where hot water is available) then for 
him four things are 'Wajib' (compulsory) and ten'things 
are 'Sunnat', as under: - 

(1,2) Two of these 'Wajib' conditions pertain to 
his secret organs which his bather should 

a. neither see 

b. nor touch, since, to do so in worse than 
seeing them. 

c. If he sees anybody else misbehaving thus, 
he should stop him from acting so, 
Otherwise he will come out of the 
Hammam a 'Gunahgar' or a sinner. It is 
stated that once Hazrat Abdullah Bin Umar 
(Allah be pleased with him) was once 
sitting in a Hummam facing the wall with 



181 



his eyes blind folded, 
d. It is therefore imperative that woman 
should never be allowed to a 'Hammam'. 

The 'Sunnats' applicable are as under:- 

(i) He should go to the Hammam for Taharat' i.e. 
cleanliness which he can not normally obtain at 
his own place, say, because of dearth of water, 
specially of hot water etc. 

(ii) Once in the Hammam he should have the 
'Niyyat' the genuine intention of coming to this 
'Abode of the Satan' per-force majeure and 
should utter the following :- 

. psr)\ OlkJji 

"In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the 
Merciful. I seek refuge with Allah from the 
impure, unclean, dirty, filthy, Satan, the 
out cast." 

(Hi) He should put his left foot first in the Hammam 
while entering it and should pay his 'Bather', his 
wages in advance so that he may perform his 
duty more willingly. 

(iv) He should try to go to the Hammam when it is 
vacant. He should npt go to its •Hot enclosure' 
quickly to make him forestall excessive 
sweating. 

(v) He should try to hurry up. 
He should not waste water unnecessarily. 



182 



(vii) He should not talk with anybody but can shake 
hands. 

(viii) He can redte Holy Qur'an quietly, but not in 
the nude. 

(ix) A man should never enter a Hammam at sunset 
or thereafter between the 'Maghrib' or 'Isha' 
prayers or subsequent to that as this is 
considered to be the time of the dispersal of the 
'Shayateen' i.e. the Satans. At such hours many 
wicked things are abroad. In any case while in 
the 'Hammam' the man should recall the fire of 
hell to his mind and shudder in its fear. The 
sensible people always do so. For instance when 
they see a pitch dark place they are reminded 
of the darkness of the grave of a sinner and of 
the venomous snakes of evil deeds in it. 

Likewise when he sees an ugly face, a Allah 
fearing man is reminded of the 'Darogha' i.e. 
the abominable incharge of hell etc. 

(x) When the man should come out of the 
'Hammam' he should bathe his feet with cold 
water to avert the danger of leprosy but he 
must take care not to wet his head with cold 
water after hot bath. Finally, to have a little nap 
after returning from the 'Hammam' is refreshing 
and invigorating, like an exhilarating syrup or a 
tonic. 

There are seven things which tend to grow in 
human body. They are directly connected with man's 
tidiness. Hence they require to be taken care of, fro 
time to time. 



(0 



(H) 



(iv) 



183 

h is better to have the hair of the head shaved 
fine There is however no harm in growing 
them as long as they are not unkempt and 
unruly Their clumsy outgrowth to an ugly and 
unweildy shape, as in the present times, is 
however not desirable. 

Similarly, to trim the moustache in conformity 
with the lower lip is 'Sunnat'. 
It is also 'Sunnat' to remove the hair in the 
armpit within forty days. 

To shave off the undergrowth of hair of man is 
also a 'Sunnat'. Maximum period allowed is 
forty days. To manicure the nails of the hands 
and the feet is also very essential. Dirty nails are 
very unhygienic. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) once saw a 
qroup of people with very large nails. He (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) summoned 
them immediately and asked them to have their 
nails trimmed, as soon as possible. It \s also 
written in the 'Hadith Sharif, that abnormaly 
large and outgrown nails serve as a comfortable 
seat and heaven for the Satan. 

Such large nails have also been called dirty 
daggers. The pointed edges of such nails are 
sharp and dangerous. 

( V ) The nails of the feet should also likewise be 
removed. 

( VI ) The cutting of the navel chord at birth is also a 
'Sunnat'. 

(vii) The 'Khatna' (Removal of extra drooping flash 



184 



of the man's genital organ) of man is a 'Sunnat', 
too. 

If the beard of a man be long then the removal 
of more than a wistful of it is permissible, so that it 
may not look unweildly and out of proportion. This is 
as per Hazrat Abdullah Bin Umar (Allah be pleased 
with him) and a follower group. On the contrary, 
according to an other group of a different school of 
thought, the beard should be allowed to grow to its 
normal length. However, the following ten things are 
considered 'Makrooh' (undesirable) in respect of a 
beard. 

(i) Dyeing of the beard. The black dye on a beard 
is tantamount to the act of Satan and the Hell- 
goers. Tiraun', (The legendary Pharooh of the 
times of the Prophet Moses) is said to have 
dyed his hair black, first of all. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) has said that "in the later times some old 
people would dye their beards. Such persons 
would not even smell the tiniest fragrance of 
Paradise." 

Amongst the old, that person is very bad who 
despite his age, does not feel any shame or disgrace in 
masquerading as a young man. This is an unnatural 
and an uncouth act. In comparison to such an old 
man, that young man is far better who may wish to 
look like an older person of wisdom and grace. 

Actually it is the devil in man which makes the 
aged to disguise themselves in this fashion due to their 



185 



hidden, unbecoming carnal desires, the dyeing of 
beards in unseemly red or yellow colours is still worse. 
Such beards look repulsive and are 'Makrooh'. There is 
only one exception to it. In the days of the prime of 
the 'Deen' (the faith) even the old and aged Ghazi's 
(Warriors for Allah) used to be so full of 'Jazba-e- 
Jehad', the spirit to participate in^oly wars that it was 
customary for them to dye their white beards black and 
go the battle field galloping, lest their enemy should 
think them weak. This is admirable and is 'Sunnat'. 

In antithesis, there are others, young and strong 
who have their beards bleached white with sulphar to 
look old, so that the regard and respect, due, to the 
elderly is paid to them in young age, although they do 
not deserve it either on account of their temperament, 
learning or age. Nor do they have wise heads over 
young shoulders. Rather they have wiseness over their 

young shoulders. They are foolish and imposters. 

/ 

To pick out white hair out of a beard is 
tantmount to branding the old age to a scourge and 
disgrace. It is woeful. It is like discarding the 'Noor' 
(The luminous light of Allah's Blessing) of Allah. It is 
stated that the angels say their rosaries as under: - 

. cJi j tUb ' t C3\'j jJl^ 'JuV^i ^3 ^ 

"Glorified is the Being who adorned the 
men with beard and the women with the 
long hair of head." 

The less said, the better for such evil persons. 



186 



A. Those who trim their beards like the tail of a 
pigeon to attract handsome women. 

B. Those who extend their hair from their heads to 
the beard for similar reasons. 

C. Those who dangle the locks of their hair down 
to the lobes o| their ears and are seen combing 
and styling their hair before others. They are 
abominable people. 

On the other hand, there are others who are 
imposters of .the first water. They purposely dishevel 
their hair, wear a heavy demeanour, so that when 
other people may see them they may think that they 
are saints of a high status who remain preocuppied 
and engrossed in the 'Ibadat and Bandagi' of Allah to 
the extent that they have no time or consideration for 
combing their hair. 

PART IV. NAMAZ: THE PRAYERS 

'Namaz' i.e. the saying of prayers in the 
foundation of faith. It surpasses all kinds of prayers. A 
person who says all the five prescribed prayers 
regularly and timely remains in Allah's protection. As 
such, a person who protects himself from major sins 
and says his prayers, Allah forgives his minor vices. 
Thus, 'Namaz' becomes a protective shield for him in 
many ways. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) and His Sohaba (companions) 
have said that these five prayers a day can be 
compared to a stream of clean water flowing alongside 
the door steps of a fortunate person. He can bathe in 
it five times a day and got rid of all the impurities of 
his body, to his extreme convenience. Such cleansing, 



187 



when also applied to the soul exhonerates the wan of 
his sins, particularly if he continues to do so 
consistently. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) has said that the 'Namaz' is the 
pillar of Faith. He, who gives it up ruins his faith. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) was respectfully asked, "which act is the 
noblest and the best of all?" He (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) replied, "Saying the prayers 
devotedly in time. It is the key to 'Jannat' (Paradise). 
After 'Tauhid' (The Unity of God), Allah likes it the 
most." 

So prized is 'Namaz' that angels crave for it. A 
person gone astray or a negligent person who foregoes 
even one 'Namaz' wantonly, does so at his peril, in 
reality. It is possible that coupled with the. other 
indiscretions and sins he has committed, he may at a 
certain stage be at the brink of that precipice from 
where his fall in to the abyss below may result in the 
complete ruin of his Faith. If one's 'Eman' is lost, there 
is nothing left behind except disaster. So much so that 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has clearly spelt out that the very first 
question that the man will be asked at the time of his 
accountability on the Day of Judgement will be the 
status of his 'Namaz'. The rest will be secondary in 
importance. His vain laments of regret and rueful 
repentance at that time will do him so good. Crying 
over spilt milk is never of any use according to the 
wise. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has further stated that a person who has 
said his prayers with piety of body and soul and with 



188 



extreme humbleness, his 'Namaz' will be translucent 
and white from the earth to the heavens above on the 
Day of the Judgement. The 'Namaz' will stand him in 
good stead on that last day and say 'that the manner 
in which you have taken care of me all along, may 
Allah protect you in His Benign Mercy in the same 
way, in return. 

Vice versa, a person who is not conscious of 
the importance of Taharaf and also does not say his 
prayers timely and regularly, his 'Namaz' rises towards 
the skies regretfully in black mass, .addresses the 
'Namazi' (i.e. the person who prays) and says 'you 
have wasted me. You have treated me badly.' It keeps 
on saying so till his prayers are wrapped up in a leap 
and are hurled down on his face. The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) has 
accordingly said "that a person who purloins his 
'Namaz' is the worst thief." 

NAMAZ : THE PRAYERS 

The 'Namaz' means worshipping Allah 
Almighty. It is therefore vital that while praying, man's 
body and soul should be in unison to bow before Him 
in extreme humbleness. 'Namaz' is performed as 
under: - 

1. Before the 'Namaz' the Muslim makes sure that 
his body and the clothes are clean i.,e. worthy 
to present one's self before Him. The soul 
conjoins the man's body in such worship. 

2. To begin with the person intending to say his 
prayers should stand on a clean and pure 



189 



(Tahir) place or on a prayer mat facing the 
'Qibla'. The distance between his feet should be 
about four-finger worth. He should bear himself 
upright with profound humility, bowed head 
and eyes fixed below at the spot it is going to 
touch in the 'Sajda' (Prostration before Allah) . 

3. Then he should recite 'Soora-e-Nas' (chapter 
from the Holy Book) to ward off the Satan. 

4. Then he should make his 'Niyyat' of the prayers 
i.e. He should resolve to perform a certain 
prayer. This 'Niyyat' or intention is vital. 

5. Now he as ready to start has 'Namaz'. He 
should begin it by raising both of his hands up, 
close to his ears in such a way that the thumbs 
of both of his hands should be almost touching 
the lobes of his ears, while the fingers of his 
hands should be extended, protuding side ways 
parallel to his shoulders. He should then say 
4 Allah-o-Akbar' (The Allah is Great) quietly and 
bring his arms down, both palms folded 
together (the right palm over the left one) and 
rest them under his chest or the navel. In this 
way a sort of a semi circle would be formed by 
his arms around the front side of his waist. 

Please remember that it is not good to bring the 
hands down from the head with a jerk to hold 
them stationary for a while along the side of the 
hips and then to fold them together in front, as 
stated above. Nor wringing the hands in a 
marked manner or fidgeting in the 'Namaz' is a 
good thing to do. Instead of jauntiness, there 
should be submissiveness and humility in 
prayers. 



190 



The 'Takbir' i.e. the words 'Allah-o-Akbar' 
should also be intoned normally, respectfully 
without playing upon the words, without any 
exaggeration on any part of it. To falsely create 
such manifestations of their own by such stupid 
people is evil. The 'Namazi' should then say the 
following:- 



"Allah is Great with all His Greatness and 
All-Praise is to Allah, the multiple Praise. 
Glorified is Allah, Day and Night." 

After that he should say the following: - 



I turn my face to Him who originated the 
heavens and the earth, and I am not of the 



Then he should recite Taooz-o-Tasmia' i.e. , 
'Subhankalla Humma', 'Aooz-o-Billah' and 
'Bismillah'. After that he should recite 'Alhamd' 
fully to the end. After finishing the 'Soora-e- 
Fatiha or Alhamd Sharif he should not join the 
'Amin' with it but should give a little gap in 
between. Then he should combine some 
'Soorah' (chapter) from the. Holy Book, with it. 

In the absence of a 'Muqtadee' (the follower in 
the Namaz), he can say the first two 'Rakaats' 




idolaters. 



(6 : 79) 



191 



(disciplines) of the morning and the evening 
prayers by vocal articulation, if he likes. 
6 Then he should say Takbir' i.e. 'Allah-o-Akbar' 
for 'Rukoo' (The state of bending on one's 
knees in prayers). While saying this Takbeer' he 
should raise his hands as aforementioned and 
then place them cupped on his knees but the 
fingers should be facing the 'Qibla'. Then he 
should recite the following, thrice in this 
position. In the absence of an 'Imam' he can 
utter these words seven to ten times. 



Glorified is My Lord, the Most Great. 

After that he should raise himself up from 
the position of 'Rukoo' and do -Rafa-e-Yaddain, (To 
raise and dip one'-s hands in Prayers). He should 
simultaneously utter the following words before 
positioning himself in the state of 'Sajda (The 
profound state of bowing prostrate before Allah be 
placing his head on the ground his forehead touching 
the surface) . 

. 9.U*- All* 

"Allah has listened to it, for whom the 
Praise has been recited." 

"O our Lord! For Thee is all praise, equal 
to all heaven and the earth' and equal to 
that which Thou will after it." 



192 



In the state of 'Sajda' he should praise Allah, 
thrice, in the following words. 

"Glorified is My Lord, the Most High and 
all Praise is for Him." 

He should then utter 'Allah-o-Akbar' and raise 
himself to a sitting position with both legs folded 
underneath. The weight of his body should be on the 
left leg. In this sitting position, both his hands should 
be placed on his knees. At this stage he should say 
the following, once. 

"O my Lord! Forgive me and be Merciful 
unto me and grant me sustenance and 
guide me and save me and pardon me 
and grant me all sorts of welfare and well- 
being." 

He should then perform the second 'Sajda' in 
the same manner saying 'AIlah-o-Akbar' and in the 
Sajda repeat 'Subhana Rabbiul Aa'la' thrice as in the 
first 'Sajda'. 

After the second Sajda, the 'Namazi' (one who 
says prayers) should place himself in the same sitting 
position, as after the first 'Sajda'. At this stage he 
should recite "Atta Hayat" with both palms of hands 
closed, resting on his knees. While reciting the 'Kalam- 
e-Shahadat' he should raise his 'Angusht-e-Shahadat' 



193 



(i.e., the finger adjoining the thumb) and pint it towards 
the 'Qibla' when say 'Illallahu' but should not point it 
towards Qibla when say 'La ilaha'. Then he should recite 
the 'Darood Sharif (Salutations and blessings on the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) reverently. In first tashhud (provided he is going to 
observe more than two Rakaats), it will be sufficient to 
recite as. 

"O Allah! Send Blessings on Hazrat 
Muhammad and on the Family of Hazrat 
Muhammad." 

If he has more than two 'Rakaats' (disciplines to 
perform, he should complete the remaining 'Rakaat' in 
the same way and as stated, recite Darood Sharif). 
Then at the final stage sitting after Tashhud' and 
recitation of complete 'Darood Sharif, he should turn 
his face towards the right, and say 'As Salaam-o- 
Alaikum wa Rahmatullah*. After that he should turn his 
face towards the left and utter the same salutation. After 
completing his prayers thus, he should pray for the 
Salaam (peace) on all those present and the 'Malaika' 
the angels 

THE MAKROOHAT OP 'NAMAZ': 
UNDESIRABLE THINGS IN 'NAMAZ' 

One should abstain from the following 
'Makroohat' i.e. the undesirable things in 'Namaz'. Also 
prayers should not be said until relieved in the first 
three of these conditions. 

(i) In dire thirst and hunger. 



194 



(U) In the state of 'uneasiness' viz when he wants to 
make water or extrude human excreta. 

(HI) When one Is mentally preocuppled in something 
which Is so intense that it may disturb his 
undivided concentration on 'Namaz'. 

(iv) To stand In such a tightly fastened position 
wherein both his feet be touching each other. 

(v) To fidget in odd ways, like 

a) To lift a leg 

b) To move hither and thither or see here and 
mere. 

c) To sit on the edge of one's feet, specially in 
•Sajda* 

d) To slope the knees right up to the stomach 

e) To conceal the hand in one's shirt 

f) To twiddle the fingers 

g) To scratch the body 

h) To yawn 

i) To play with the hair of the beard etc. 

One who is fully alive to the fact that he is 
present before his Allah Almighty, will never do so. 

Amongst the aforementiond 'Arkan-e-Namaz' 
i.e. the (Essential elements of 'Namaz'), the following 
are Tarz' (A must) on a Muslim. 

(1) 'Niyyat', the Intention 

(2) Takbir-e-Tahrima l.f saying *Allah-o-Akbar' at 
proper places. 

(3) 'Qiyam'. The position of standing hand folded 
in 'Namaz'. 



195 



(4) 'Alhamd*. To redte Sorra-e-Fatiha. 

(5) 'Rukoo'. To bow down on one's knees in 
'Namaz'. 

(6) 'Qauma'. Rising from the state of 'Rukoo' 

(7) 'Araam-e-Qouma' i.e. to come to an upright 
position from the 'Rukoo' and wait for just a 
while before going down for 'Sajda' 

(8) 'Sajda'. The position of lying prostrate before 
Allah, forehead touching the surface. 

(9) 'Araam-e-Sajda. The rest in Sajda during the 
period of praising Allah. 

(10) 'Jalsa'. The state of sitting between the two 
'Sajdas*. 

(11) The lost 'Tashahud'. The final position when 
'Atta Hayat is recited' while sitting, before 
ending the 'Namaz'. 

(12) To impart 'Darood-o-Salam' (Blessings and 
salutations) on the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) . 

(13) Salam. To look both ways and send salutations 
at the time of ending the 'Namaz' i.e. the 
prayers. These things constitute the basic 
infrastructure of the 'Namaz'. The main thing is 
the spirit or devotion in which prayers are 
offered by a 'Banda' (a servant) before Allah 
Almighty. 

THE HOOH' I.E. THE SPIRIT OF 'NAMAZ', 
THE PRAYERS 

The part of just concluded pertains to the 
prayers and the body of man. Now we come to the 



196 



more important part of it viz the 'Namaz' and the soul 
of man. The first Is superficial and physical while the 
later is inner and vital. 

For every 'Zikr' (Remembrance and worship of 
Allah) and 'Namaz" the prayer, the corresponding 
soul, is a pre-requlsite vis a vis the man's body. To 
illustrate it, one can quote the following examples. 

(i) That it is like a body, like a man without 
examples. 

(il) That it is like a deaf person, who has the ears 

but can not listen, 
(iii) That it is like a blind man who has the eyes but 

can not see. 

As a result of it we are left with no other 
alternative but to come to the conclusion that 
the 'Rooh' of the 'Namaz' is in the 'Huzoor-e- 
Qalb', in the heart's full immersion in the 
•Marafat' and the worship of Allah. That Is the 
very basis, the purpose of 'Namaz'. Allah says:- 

( > t:i^) rf/JU'ljEallpIi 

And establish the Prayer for My 
remembrance. (20 : 14) 

Therefore, what is in the forefront Is the heart, 
the soul, the good 'Nafs*, the 'Rooh' of man. The body 
has secondary significance and is, as such, in the 
background in the order of it importance. Hence a 
person's act of praying, constituting the ostensible 
physical ritual without the real essence of his being in 



197 



It, is nothing but a void. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) said that "There are 
many people for whom there is nothing but distress 
and fatigue in the Namaz. It is because they say their 
prayers with the body only and not by the soul." 
Naturally, such a 'Namaz' can only be a burden for 
them. It gives them so solace or exhilaration. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has further stated "that there are a number of Namazis 
who say their prayers so listlessly that only one sixth or 
one tenth of is considered cogent and ascribed to their 
credit in their performance record. He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) said that one's prayers 
should be akin to the strong sentiments one has in his 
heart at the farewell of a near and dear one and that is 
the time when a devoted 'Namazi' gets fully engrossed 
in his Allah and parts company with the 
engrandisement of his vain self and of the worldly 
desires:!" 

Hazrat 'A'isha (Allah be pleased with her), the 
wife of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has adoration and the awe of Allah 
engrained by Him (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) in us that while talking to each other, as 
soon as the hour of 'Namaz' used to come, He (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) used to get so 
inspired as to forget our presence. She said (Allah be 
pleased with her) that later she also became like that. 
The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has said that 'he who ignores his 'Namaz' 
gets ignored by Allah'. It is such a big lapse. 

It is stated that Prophet Abraham (Hazrat 



198 



Ibrahim may peace of Allah be upon him) used to get 
so worked up and roused to a state of such vehement 
adoration and awe of Allah, sobbing and sighing, 
aglow with such violent suffering in the love and 
worship of Allah, while saying his prayers that his 
onlookers used" to literally hear the sound of his heart 
gurgling and palpitating like a boiling kettle of water. 
Similarly it is said that Hazrat AH (Allah be pleased with 
him) (Holy Prophet may peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) renowned companion and son in law, 
also called 'Eli' (Rehmat ullah Alaih) used to shiver in 
every limb and his beautiful face used to turn colour 
before 'Namaz* and used to say that *the time to 
shoulder the 'Bar-e-Amanat', the supreme trust and 
the greatest responsibility has arrived . So great, he 
used to qualify that the heaven and earth put together 
could not do it. Gloria in excelsis! (Glory be to Allah)! 

(i) Hazrat Sufian Thoori (Rahmat ullah Alaih) has 
said that a person who does not say his prayers with 
his heart and soul should know that he has not said 
any prayers. 

(ii) Hazrat Ma'az Bin Jabl (Allah be pleased with 
him) has said that even if involuntarily, a man saying 
his prayers comes to know as to who is standing on his 
right side, he should simultaneously become aware that 
he is not saying his.'Namaz'. 

(Hi) Hazrat Khawja Hassan Basri (Rahmat ullah 
Alaih) has said that a person who says his prayers 
without ardour and faithful service to Allah is doing 
more harm to himself than performing an act which 
may earn his a reward. 



199 

However, Imam Abu Hanifa (Rahmat ullah 
Alalh),Imam Shafal (Rahmat ullah Alaih) and some 
other renowned 'Ulema' have delineated and given 
the'Fatwa* (A religious judgement) that if the devotion 
of a 'Namazl' be manifest at the time of the first 
Takbir' (AUah-o-Akbar) then his 'Namaz' can be 
considered 'acceptable'. This is as it may be but the 
fact remains that whereas the emphasis on the best 
attention is in the best interests of all Muslims, a prayer 
can only be called a real 'Namaz* when the maximum 
involvement of the body and the soul of the man may 
be in it. Of course, the man who is devout at the time 
of saying the Takbir-e-Tahrlma' Is better than the 
person who has completely neglected his 'Namaz'. 

Vice versa, such a person who is attentive at 
the time of the first Takbir' and not later, may for all 
we know be more liable to be taken to task because of 
his neglect after standing for the prayers than the one 
who Is an absolute absconder from It. 

It Is also in the 'Hadith Sharif that a person 
who can not keep himself away from an appropriate 
thoughts during prayers will not be able to get near 
Allah. Therefore one can sum up from this discourse 
that It is vital that the heart of man must be 'Hazir' 
(present) In the spirit of the 'Namaz', I.e. the worship 
of Allah from the beginning to the end. The lack of 
dedication to Him in the 'Namaz' is like a man who is 
sick and on his last breaths. 



200 



THE FACTS ABOUT THE HOOK - THE SPIRIT 
OF THE 'ARKAN-E-NAMAZ* I.E. THE ESSENTIAL 
ELEMENTS OF PRAYERS 

Now we come to the inner depths of the 
'Namaz'. The first thing you hear is the voice of the 
'Moozzln' saying the 'Azan' (The call for prayers). It is a 
call of the faith for the faithful. You should therefore 
pay full heed to it and listen to it with keen interest, 
fondly. You should leave everything status quo when 
you hear this message. 

The people in the olden days used to get 
activated and enthralled by it. They were good people. 
They used to give up and postpone the work in hand 
on hearing it and used to listen to the 'Azan' with joie 
de viverie. The blacksmith used to put down the 
uplifted hammer, the shoe maker used to lay down the 
leather pin, on hearing this voice. 

On hearing this heralding voice from the 
minaret of a mosque, people used to conjecture the 
Day of the Judgement and feel glad that on that Day 
of the .days they would be better off on account of 
their immediate response to this call to the faithful. 
You should also follow them suit. 

A. CLEANLINESS AND TIDINESS 

The underlying spirit, the secret de factum of 
cleanliness lies in its obvious and inherent implications. 
So, the tidiness of clothes and the body are like an 
outer coverlet. The real thtng is not the cover, but 
what is confined in tt, not that a good coverlet does 
not have its value. In the infrastructure of the body is 
the heart, the citadel of the 'Marafat* of Allah. Tauba' 



201 



(Repentance) of man and the resolve to abstain from 
bad deeds, do good, and worship the God, is the food 
of the soul and 'Nafs-e-Mutmainna', the holy 'Nafs' of 
man. Thus summum bonum the 'Manztf', the final goal 
of the worship for the 'Marafat' of Allah and of the 
verity of 'Namaz' lies in the heart, the heaven of 
sublime happiness for the ardent seeker. 

SATRE - AURAT: In simple translation it means a 
woman's covering up and hiding those parts of her 
anatomy which can attract the opposite sex. As such 
this factum is the basis of 'Purdah' (covering up) of 
woman as prescribed in Islam. It's 'Rooh', i.e. the real 
spirit behind it is that the woman should be aware that 
the Allah is All Seeing and All Knowing. Hence any 
instinct in her to attract or be attracted by the opposite 
sex unless authorised by matrimony is a heinous sin for 
which the punishment is very severe. Such a behaviour 
is thus to be disdained and abhored strictly. Only the 
good 'Nafs', the good soul, the veritable heart, which 
may be afraid of Allah can make a woman do this and 
maintain her 'Satar' (The covered and confined bearing 
of woman). Those women who have been lax in this 
regard should, as such be deeply repentant of their 
transgression and resolve to follow the dictates of Islam 
and the Allah in their true letter and spirit. It is stated 
in the Hadith that repentance eradicates evil. 

"A person who repents over his sin, is like 
a person who has committed no sin." 

If therefore behoves such a person to rue and 
repent such follies sincerely and ask the forgiveness of 



202 

Allah, the Merciful most submissively, truly ashamed of 
his self in such a supplicant manner, that seeing His 
'Banda', this servant in a state of acute contrition, the 
Allah may forgive him. 



TO BE 'QIBLA ROO\- TO FACE THE 'QIBLA' 
(THE HOUSE OF ALLAH). It's literal meaning is to 
detract one's self, one's face from all sides and turn 
one's face to the 'Qibla' (The Khana-e-Kaaba i.e. the 
House of Allah in Makkah-e-Mukarama). However, its 
implied inner meaning is that the man should exclude 
everything else from it and concentrate his heart to 
Allah alone, so that a genuine conformity of 'Zahir-o- 
Batin', the outer and the inner self is attained. Like 
there is a 'Zahiri Qibla', a Qibla in physical existence, 
which represents Allah. In truth the Qibla of the heart,' 
the 'Batin' is also the same i.e. the Allah Almighty. 

Stretching the point further, to turn one's face 
away hither and thither in directions other than that of 
the 'Qibla', is tantamount to going in the wrong 
direction, to losing one's way. ,In the same manner, as 
a Namaa' (one who says his prayers) is considered to 
be in grave error if he says his prayers not facing the 
Qibla , he would be worse placed if his soul is not 
rightly directed towards Allah. Obviously, what is 
contained in the cover is more important than the 
coverlet itself. The Holy Prophet (peace "and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) has emphasised this point and 
said that 'a person who stands before Allah, so 
constituted in body and soul that his face, his heart 
and all the heart's desires are solely directed towards 
Allah, is so fortunate that he will come out of his 
'Namaz' like a new born babe does out of his mother's 
womb." 



203 



The 'Namaz' of that person whose soul is not 
rightly directed towards Allah in his 'Namaz', is 
accordingly worse placed than of that person whose 
face and body are not towards 'Qibla'. 

'QIYAM*: TO STAND IN PRAYERS. In nutshell, it 
means that whatever his bodily structure, a man should 
stand in 'Namaz' before Allah as a humble servant 
does before his great master, in this case the Master 
being the Supreme Lord and Master of all. This is the 
'Zahiri Haqiqat' i.e. the superficial truth. The 'Batini* 
i.e. the real truth is that:- 

(a) Apart from the above, the heart should absolve 
Itself of all worldly cares and get absorbed in 
Him and Him alone with extreme humility and 
subservience. 

(b) He should face his Lord like a person penitent 
and broken hearted for his sins, full of deep 
sorrow and remorse for his evil deeds. 

(c) He should think of the Day of the Judgement, 
realise that Allah of All seeing, All knowing and 
Most forgiving and ask for His pardon for his 
mistakes and seek His kindness to enable him to 
perform good deeds and earn His blessings. 

(d) He should be so enamoured of the Benificience 
of Allah that his 'heart', his soul, his 'Nafs' 
should ardently aspire to attain His 'Marafat'. It 
should therefore not matter i.e. give the 
'Namazi' a feeling of any disgrace or shame 
when some body sees him saying his prayers, as 
to how he is performing his 'Namaz'. The 
shame for one's evil deeds should only be 



204 



before Allah. A 'Muttaqi' (a pious person) would 
be only too pleased if he sees a 'Namazf saying 
his prayers whole-heartedly. 

'RUKOO-0-SUJOOD\ The simple meaning of the 
'Rukoo' (To bow down before Allah on one's knees in 
Namaz) and 'Sajood* (plural of sajda to bow down 
prostrate before Allah, head touching the surface in 
prayers) is to demonstrate extreme humbleness and 
devotion in such states before Allah while saying one's 
prayers. In reality, a person who places his head on 
the ground, on earth before Allah knows well the state 
of his being, as to how lowly, unsigniftcant, cast down 
and abased his worth is. He fully realises the truth of 
his existence mat his very essence is of 'Khak-o-Metti', 
of dust, and finally it shall be 'dust unto dust' - that will 
be his final destination. Thus, there is a secret, a 
hidden spirit, a real meaning in everything. 

HAQIQAT-E-QIRAAT : RECITATION IN NAMAZ. 

The importance of what the 'Namazf says in 'Namaz' is 
very important. It is essential that he should know what 
he is saying so that he may live up to it. For instance 
the meaning of 'Allah-o-Akbar* is that Allah is Great. 
Accordingly, the achievement of his 'Marafat' should 
be the paramount of the the person who is uttering 
these words. This should consequently lead him to 
realise His grandeur. Hence if this veracity is not in his 
heart, he is stark Illiterate. On the contrary, if Allah 
forbid, despite knowing the meanings of what he is 
uttering in his prayers, he considers some- other thing 
greater than Him, then he is a Bar. It would mean that 
he is obedient to some one other than Allah whom he 
reveres and regards more than Him. Allah has 



205 



proclaimed in the Holy Book that:- 

( t T : <gi*Jl) •••••*» tyl Cr* 

Hast thou seen him who has taken his 
caprice to be his god.... (45 : 23) 

When man said Wajhat Wajhi*. it meant that 'I 
have truned my face away from the world i.e. from 
everything and turned it towards You'. K, after uttering 
these words his heart is attracted by or directed 
towards something else, then, in not believing in what 
he is saying he is not only liable for being a liar but 
also for blasphemy. Indeed Allah is Great. Verily He is 
Supreme but despite its undeniable veracity, his 
calumny is believing and acting to the contrary is 
evident. So, one who starts the proceedings of his 
prayers by blowing hot and cold in the same breath 
from the very beginning, is obviously putting himself in 
a very dangerous and desperate position. For a man to 
say 'Hantfa Muslima', clearly means that he has openly 
proclaimed that he is a Muslim. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that "only he is a Muslim of 
whose hands and tongue no one suffers an injury." 
So, it is vital that a man of faith should resolve to be 
such a person and fortify himself with its characteristics. 
Similarly to utter 'Alhamd' means that the Muslim 
should all the time be in thanks giving to Allah and be 
grateful to Him for His bounties. This a 'Kalam-e- 
Shukr' viz a statement of being grateful and gratitude 
dwells In the heart. Likewise when he reaches 'Iyyaka 
Na'abudo' then he should be humble and supplicant. 



206 



At the words 'Ihidna' his heart should wail, beseeching 
Him for guidance. Likewise, in hii recitations the heart 
of the man praying should assume the traits of his 
entreaties. 

Likewise, in his recitation in the prayers, as the 
proceeds further, he should dp so in the true letter and 
the spirit of what he is saying. His heart should assume 
the traits of his entreaties. The name superficial uttering 
of words and syllables is of no use. 

Every syllable of the 'Namaz' is a jewel par 
excellence for your betterment in this life and in the 
hereafter. Adorn yourself by them. In it lies the secret 
of your happiness. 

THE METHOD TO ACHIEVE HUZOORE-E- 
QALB. Neglect or lack of proper care in Namaz occurs 
due to two major reasons. One is 'Zahiri', i.e. external 
and the other is 'Batini' viz internal, of the 'Baton' - 'the 
soul'. The external causes can be enumerated as 
follows :- 

1. Prayers should be said at a quiet place. A 
mosque is ideal. In any case, all sorts of 
clamour, din and loud persistent noise, specially 
if it is continuous and uproarious is likely to 
obtrude the attention of the 'Namazi' to 
distraction. A secluded and dark place has 
always been considered the best, that is why 
some 'Ibadat Guzars' (People devoted to 
worship) segregate such a place for thin prayers 
in thin houses. A large place staggers and 
dissimilates concentration. A secluded nook is 
always better. 



207 



Hazrat Ibne Usman (Allah be pleased with him) 
used to set aside all things of his armoury like 
his waist-band, spear and the sword for the 
some purpose, before prayers. 
If the work in hand be important and leaving it 
undone at that stage may be disturbing in the 
'Namaz', then it should be quickly concluded 
before prayers. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said:- 

"When the food is served and the time of 
night prayer also enters, then take the 
food first.'' 

In case a 'Namazl' is overtaken by the 'BatiF i.e. 
ignoble thoughts before Namaz, he should try 
to:- 

a) Divert his mind vigorously by contemplating 
on the sanctity of the prayers and the words 
he utters therein, beseeching Allah to come 
to his rescue. 

b) Or he should take a 'Mashal' or self cure by 
resisting the Satan valiantly. The principle of 
such cure lies in divesting, in cutting root 
and branch, in eradicating what is lying in 
his way. It can be described by the example 
that In a similar situation, a man sitting 
under* a shaded tree was being disturbed 
out of his wits by the din by many 
clamouring and chirping birds on the tree. 
He was sitting under this tree. He tried to 
ward them off by a stick but failed. The tree 



208 



being his own he ws left with no other 
course but to chop it off. He did so and 
knew that he would, now, never be 
disturbed in his prayers. 

c) A person respectfully presented a fine piece 
of cloth to the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him). It had the 
picture of a plant engraved upon it. The 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) returned it to him after 
prayers and donned his old attire again. 

d) Also, He (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) once relieved himself quickly of 
a new pair of shoes which he had just then 
worn. He gave mem to the first passerby, 
after 'Namaz'. 

e) Similarly, He (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) also did away with a new pair 
of shoe laces, after prayers. 

f) Likewise, it is stated that Hazrat Talha 
(Allah be pleased with him) was saying his 
prayers in his garden. Suddenly he saw a 
beautiful bird stuck in the shrubbery. It 
could not extricate itself from the bushes. 
Hazrat Talha's heart was diverted towards 
him. He got so agitated that he came to the 
Rasool Ullah (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) forthwith, stated what had 
happened and in penance gave away the 
entire garden in 'Sadaqa' (offering to Allah). 
So, we should follow these 'Buzargane 
Deen* (The elite of the Faith) suit. 



209 



It Is thus the 'Khashoo', the complete devotion, 
of the soul towards 'Namaz*. to Allah, that is of the 
essence. Hence It follows that:- 

(0 The less the external noise the more the 'Rooh' 
the soul will flourish. 

00 The more devoted the soul, the purer its worth 
and pursuit will be. 

There is no manipulation In 'Nafse Mutmainna' 
i.e the satisfied 'Nafs', the soul the heart. It Is pure 
and is attained by purity alone. Hence the secret of its 
acquisition lies in following the dictates of Allah and 
being absolutely spellbound and enchanted in the 
ecstasy of his 'Sifat' of his 'great characteristics and 
miraclous wonders'. Summum bonum, the secret of 

u S ?u *n a r k ! nin9 *■ in the wakened self. This is 
how the 'Dll' - the heart becomes 'Hazir'. 

PAYERS BY JAMAAT (CONGREGATION) AND 
ITS IMPORTANCE IN SUNNAH 

According to the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) a prayer said 
Bajama'af, in congregation is equivalent to 
twenty seven prayers said alone i.e. it is equal 
to saying prayers like 'Tahajjud' at midnight i.e. 
the prayer was awake in the 'Yad' the 
•remembrance' of Allah all night. 
The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has further said that a person 
who does not omit a single 'Bajamat' prayer for 
forty days becomes 'Blessed of the Paradise'. 
Haarat Saeed Bin Massayab (Allah be pleased 



(0 



(«) 



(III) 



210 



with him) said that he considers himself very 
fortunate that for the last twenty years I have 
been coming to the mosque before 'Namaz' 
regularly*. 

(iv) There is a school of thought which strongly 
opposes and criticises saying prayers at home 
without valid excuse. 

As regards an 'Imam', the person who leads the 
prayers the following points may please be noted. 

(a) A person should not try to become an Imam of 
a congregation on his own. 

(b) It is a worthy position. An Imam should as such 
be a person who has been happily chosen by 
the general agreement and the consensus of 
opinion of the 'Namazis'. 

(c) To decline to say the prayers behind an Imam 
without absolutely valid and justified reasons can 
sow the seeds of discontentment and disunity 
amongst the Muslims. 

(d) Naturally, an Imam should be a pious and a 
dignified person. 

For 'Namaz Ba Jamaat', the following things are 
necessary. 

(i) 'Azan' (call for prayers) should be timely said. 

(H) The prayers should start on time, even if there 
be two 'Muqtadees* in the congregation. In the 
olden days people never delayed the 'Namaze 
Janaza', for instance, even if four persons were 



211 



present. One day the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) was not there to 
lead the prayers at the stipulated time. In his 
absence Hazrat Abdur Rehman Bin Auf (Allah 
be pleased with him) led the prayers. Some of 
the people in the congregation were rather 
scared. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be pleased with him) joined the prayers 
in the second 'Rakat'. After the prayers He, 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
appreciated that the 'Jamaat' and the prayers 
were timely held. He (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) advised them to do so 
always. 

(iii) The cleanliness and the decorum of the mosque 
should be maintained. 

(iv) The Qur'an and books on 'Hadith* should be 
available for people to read. 

In the beginning no remuneration was paid to 
the •Imam*. Later, as the mosque started taking the 
shape of an institution, the 'Imam' started being paid, 
for responsibilities on whole-time basis. In 'Namaze 
Ba'jamaat' the rows should be straight. The Imam' 
should recite from the Holy Book in the 'Namaz' with 
loud 'Qir'aat' i.e. recitation and also pronounce the 
Takbirs' loudly. The 'Imam' should be careful that he 
gives proper pauses between 'Rakaats' and recitations 
to allow the late comers to join the congregation 
without any difficulty. 

Hazrat Anas (Allah be pleased with him) has 
quoted that 'The 'Namaz' of the Holy Prophet (peace 



212 



and blessings of Allah be upon him) was the finest 
example of the rendering of the prayer. Apart from its 
obvious stature; the young, the old, the sick - all used 
to feel themselves happily, conveniently enthralled in 
an aura of enchantment without parallel likewise the 
'Muqtadi', the follower in the congregation should 
remain in full discipline of the rites of the 'Namaz'. Like 
others who are properly agned to the call of the 
'Imam', the 'Muqtadi* should be in 'Qiam' when the 
'Imam' is in 'Qiam' and in 'Rukoo' or 'Sajda' when teh 
'Imam' is in Rukoo or 'Sajda'. He should not either 
precede the Imam before any call, nor wantonly or 
habttantly be late in responding to it. Sunnum bonum, 
the movements of the entire 'Jamaat' should be 
uniform, 'without any odd man out' in it. 

After the 'Salaam' the Imam should spare 
enough time for the Muqtadi to be able to say the 
following. 

- f 1 J J**J'* it 
"O Allah! Thou art all Peace and from 
Thee is all Peace and to Thee return all 
peace. So keep us alive in Peace and 
make us enter in the House of Peace. O 
our Lord! Thou art full of blessings and in 
all Peace and make us enter in the House 
of Peace. O our Lord! Thou art full of 
blessings and the Most High." 

THE IMPORTANCE OF THE 'JUMUA' PRAYER 

'Jumua' has always been treated as an Eid day by the 



213 



Muslims. It is called the 'Sayyid ul-Ayyam' i.e., the 
leader of the days. Even in common day language we 
call it 'Jumua'. For the day of 'Jumua', it has been said 
that :- 

(i) A person who does not say three Muma' 
prayers consecutively, wantonly, he is like a 
person who has gone out of the ranks of the 
faith of Islam. 

(U) It is stated in the 'Hadith' that it is such a 
consecrated day that Allah the Merciful sets six 
lacs people free out of 'Dozakh', the Hell on 
Friday. The heart of a person who foregoes 
Jumua prayers gets tarnished. 

(Hi) It is stated that the fire of hell is kindled in the 
afternoon except on 'Jumua'. 

(iv) It is stated that the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) that a good 
person who dies on Friday gets the status of a 
•martyr' and is exhonerated of the miseries of 
the *Qabr\ the grave. 

CONDITIONS OF 'JUMUA' 

There are six additional conditions of the 'Jumua 
prayers. 

(i) The first of these conditions is that of the strict 
punctuality of the Jumua prayers. Unlike other 
prayers, after the Imam has concluded the Jumua 
prayers after saying the final 'Salaam', the late 
comer will not be able to say the Jumua prayers 
on his own. He has lost his 'Jumua'. He will have 
to say 'Zuhr' prayers instead. 

(ii) The second condition is that Jumua prayers can 
not be said in a desert or in a tent i.e., it can 



214 



only be performed in a dty or villiage where at 
least forty sound in mind and in their full senses 
are present, to unite and say it. 

(Hi) It is not necessary that the place of congregation 
should be a mosque. It can be said at any 'Pak' 
place and that this 'Namaz' replaces the 'Zuhr' 
prayers on a Friday. 

(iv) That people can not say this prayer in separate 
groups at the same time. They have to say it 
behind an Imam, even if they get the second 
(Rakaat) in his following. 

(v) The fifth condition is that people may not have 
said their Jumua prayers already, for, in normal 
conditions there should not be more than one 
'Jamaat' in a dty. However should the city be 
so big that the 'Namazls' of that place may not 
be able to assemble in one Masjid or if they 
come on time, then under these extenuating 
circumstances there is no harm in more than 
one 'Jamaat' (congregation for prayers). 

(vi) The sixth condition is that of the 'Khutba' 
(Religious address) which is said before 'Namaz'. 

There are two 'Khufba's of Jumua and both are 
'Fare' (essential) . 

(1) The Praise of Allah, the 'Hamd', starting 
with the word 'Alhamd' 

(ii) To send 'Darood' on the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him). 

(iii) Discourse on Taqwa' (virtue) etc. 

(iv) And reciting from the Holy Qur'an, even if 
it be one 'Ayah' (verse) is essential In the 
first 'Khutbh'. 



215 



In the second 'Khutba' also the four tilings are 
likewise essential but in this Khutba, (the recitation 
from the Holy Book having been done in the first 
Khutba) instead of 'Ayat-e-Qur'ani*. general prayers are 
stipulated to be made, specially for the Umma' (the 
general brotherhood) . 

The Jumua prayers are not essential or 'Farz' for 
women, children and the slaves. Those who are invalid, 
ill or unable to go for 'Jumua' prayers due to 
insurmountable deterrents in the way can say 'Zuhr' (the 
afternoon prayers) prayers instead. But such 'Zuhr' 
prayer should be offered after the Jumua prayers have 
concluded. 

THE SANCTITY OF JUMUA PRAYERS 

There are ten things vital to be able to 
commemorate the Jumua in its true 'Adaab' i.e., in its 
true letter and spirit. Most of them are Sunnat:- 

1. Those who know the significance of the day of 
Jumua start looking forward to it one day 
ahead. It has two things in its wake; the happy 
augury 'The Barkat', the pleasant /aroma of a 
'Mubarak' day of good fortune and its venerated 
status as a day of blessings and Allah's favours. 
To inaugurate it in its true spirit people are 
found to be making preparations for it in 
advance in differnet ways. They lay down 
clean,, good looking raiments to don on Friday 
or keep a bottle of 'for' (perfume) handy to wear 
it on 'Yaum-ul-Jumua' (the Friday). There are 
others with more pious inclinations of the soul, 
who start saying penance 'Astaghfar' on their 



216 



rosary right after the 'Namaze Asr' i.e. the 

tTZV^u? .°" Thursdai '- redte 
from tfw Holy Book. Some go to the standards 
of saying special Tahajjud' (midnjghtly prayers) 
Prayers in thanks giving and the Praise of JUS. 
Some tW (Plural of Ahm, the learned) have 

^1*? 10 COn,U9ate mh one ' s ^ 
on Shabe Jumua' i.e., on Thursday night 

preceding Friday has a virtue in itself for tne 

aUht f! u reward ) ofd ^Purposes,.in taking 
a bath for both, on the 'Jumua morning. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has laid great stress on having a 

^ ° n u Fti tf V C ^ Wh ° *> to mosque 
early should bathe early. However, the later 

Jul* 88 / U - the nearer the <Na ^-e- 
Jumua the better. Taking a bath specially in 

preparation for the J Umua prayers has its own 
Sawaab (reward). The worst thing conceivable 
LI ^7 ^ remaining dirty and uncouth on this 
day In Madina al-Munawwarah (the dry of the 

?n°n« ^ (PeaCe and 0,ess,n S s of «««h be 
upon him) when a strong stricture is passed on 
some one it is said "He? Do'nt talk of him. He 

Lh ^ 11 f* man Wh0 does "<* **« a 
bath on Friday." 

Big or small, poor or rich- the significance, the 
attachment and the importance one has in his 
mind of this day will be reflected in the visible 
preparations he has made for the Jumua, like 
a) Wearing new or dean clothes looking 
Pleasing to the eye, preferably wearing 
white anen. * 



217 



b) Having a hair cut 

c) Cutting the nails; manicuring. 

d) Having the beard and the moustache 
trimmed. 

e) Wearing a perfume etc. 

It is such a day of rejoicing that replete with 
Godliness and general sense of well-being 
people throng the mosques right from early 
morning. In the olden days people used to go 
the mosques with the 'Chiraghs' (lamps) in their 
hand, soon after the morning prayers. So 
inspired they used to be. No wonder the 
mosques used to overflow with the well attired 
'Namaziy hours before the 'Jumua' prayers. 
Once Hazrat Abdullah Bin Masood (Allah be 
pleased with him) entered the mosque early in 
the morning and found four people already 
there. He was excercised that he exclaimed in 
chagrin 'what's going to come of me on the Day 
of the Judgement when I am the fourth person 
to reach the mosque on the Day of 'Jumua'? 
naturally, when the non-believering Christians 
and Jews can make, it so early to thin places of 
worship why can't q Muslim? 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said "that a Momin who goes 
to the mosque (in first 'Sa'at') early morning in 
like a person who has sacrificed a camel in the 
name of Allah. The person who goes there in 
the 'second Sa'at' after that in equivalent to a 
person who has sacrificed a cow for Allah, 
likewise, the person who does so in the third 
Sa'at* In like the one who has sacrificed a goat 



218 



I* 6 nan *f of AUah - The last entrant of the 
™sque «■ ** the reward equivalent ot a 
who has sacrificed a hen In the Name of 

kZk* WHen iHl* (one wh0 the 

Khutba, a religions discourse) rises up to the 

oTSTJ?* an9 ^ WaP UP P ara PhemaIla 
oMhin office and get engrossed in listening to 

The fifth decorum of decency is that the late 
comers should intend themselves with the fast 
rows. They should not stampede and straggle 
others by raising and hoisting thin feet over the 
shoulders and heads of the people in front 
rows In a befitting rebuke over such an 
uncivilised behaviour, a man who had done so 
was put to great shame when he was asked by 
tf* Holy Prophet (peace and blessing sof Allah 
be upon him). «Wh y did you not say your 

^ P T ? " , HC ""*"" d " Sir . 1 with 
you in the Jumua' prayers." The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
rephed thereupon "No, you did not^ay your 

ofTZf ovemjnni "9 the heads 

of others. One who does so is like the one who 
nas not performed his prayers." 

The sixth principle de grada is that no one 
should cross in front of a person who is saying 
his prayers^ It Is forbidden. It is in the Hadith 
that It is better to be dissipated to dust rather 
Am* cross the path of a Ghazl (Fighter for 



219 



It is a matter of honour to be as near the Imam, 
the Prayer-leader as possible. That is why, you 
may have noticed a tendency on the part of the 
elderly and the elite of soul and demeanour, 
trying to find place in the first row by coming to 
the mosque early. In a way, they too in their 
own right are the leaders and are generally seen 
in leading places and positions. But the very 
same virtuous men leave the first rows and 
come to the lost rows when they find 
prententious people of worldly possessions in 
rich garments and showy exteriors flaunting 
themselves in the first rows. Allah likes the 
glittering hearts of His people, not their 
glistening attire of arrogance and daredo. 
The eighth advice to always keep in mind is to 
conduct one's self with dignity commensurate 
with the spirit of the place and day The place 
is the mosque and the Day, the Jumua fad 
Mubarak'. It therefore devolves on a Muslim to 
display the amptitude of a Muslim come to the 
mosque. A pleasantly serene demeanour is 
therefore of the essence. Specially at the time of 
Khutba, He should sit quietly and listen to it 
attentively. If somebody tries to enter into 
conversation with him he should not speak back 
but should make a polite sign and beckon hhn 
not to talk. That is why the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) has 
said of such prattlers that 'If somebody speaks 
to some one during 'Khutba', "the person who 
tries to stop him from doing so by words in 
turn, wiU not get the 'Sawaab' of the prayers of 



220 



9. 



w: 50 important * ,istenins to *■ <Khutba> 

Even If one may not be abl* k 
comprehend what the 'KhattbM. * T ° T 
the distance, he fh Jd 1 J**"? , duc to 
maintain a oulet and -SL 
It Is stated in the 'Hadith Sharif that a ner^n 

saved from IL ° SqUe °" ' Jumua ' ^ be 

angular ^on ^t^ 
'Jumua'. foUow lng on 

1) Soora-e-Fatiha 

2) Soora-e-Ikhlas 

3) Soora-e-Falaq 

4) Soora-e-Nas 

Allah! O AU-SulBcing, O All Praised O 

As a matter of fact, the old sages have said 

a person who says this prayeTrW^ 

core of his heart wlH getV^C^ 



221 



from such strange and unforeseen sources that 
he will never be able to even dream of them. 
And he will become carefree of the 'Makhlooq', 
the world. It is also advisable that he should 
also say six 'Rakaats' of Sunnat, as the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) used to do. 

10. The last but not the least, the tenth lesson 
is that if a Muslim is not able to remain in the 
mosque for reasons beyond his control and 
is left with no other alternative but go home, 
then he should try and make up for its loss 
by completely engrossing himself in Allah, 
seeking His Supreme Mercy for its adequate 
compensation or even for more. 

THE SPECIAL FEATURES OF'YAUMUL JUMU'A 

It is fortunate that a Muslim can look forward to seven 
special blessings that are akin to this day. 

(i) On this 'Mubarak* i.e. blessed day man should 
sit in the company of 'Ahlullah and Ahle 
Taqwa' Allah's exalted people of virtue whose 
advice and guidance will put them on to the 
path of piety and goodness. In their company 
sincere people of faith learn what to do, how to 
do it; what not to do and how to avoid it. They 
can collect pearls of wisdom from them and 
enrich their life and the hereafter. The Holy 
Qur'an and the true Hadith become their 
sentinal in life. As somebody said one moment 
in the company of such a man whose prayers 
get heard by Allah, is more than a thousand 
Rakaat of 'Nawafil'. (Nawafil, plural of 'Naff ■ 



(ii) 



(iii) 



222 

additional prayers of worship). 
It is 'Hadith Sharif that there is a 'Sa'at' a 
moment of such virtue in the day of Juma 
unknown precisely as in «Laila tul Qadr' (The 
night of Beneficience) when any valid prayer 
made, is instantaneously granted. One who 
seeks, achieves the true devotees consequently 
pray relentless by on Fridays, which, in any 
case is a day of distinct worth and 
accomplishments. 

On this day one should send Darood-o-Salam 
on the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) as much as possible 
Somebody asked the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) and He replied 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) that 
if someone sends the following Darood his 
sins of a year will be forgiven. 

fUJij il^Sj U^, Akpl j ftb i *Wj ^ 

*»J* J* ^ j & p g ^ u ^ 

"O Allah! Send Thy Blessings on Hazrat 
Mohammad and the Family of Hazart 
Muhammad, a blessing with which Thou 
art pleased and in a manner that is rightly * 
due to him. And grant him al-Wasilah and 
the superiority and the Most Praised 
station of which thou has promised to him 
and award him that which is befitting him 



223 



and award him better than that Thou 
awarded to any prophet of any 
community and Send Thy blessings on all 
his brotheren from among the prophets 
and the righteous persons: O Merciful of 
all the mercifuls." 

It is also said that a person who sends the above 
Darood, on the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) seven times on 
Friday. He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) will intervene for him on the Day of 
Judgement. Even to say 'Allahumma Salli 'Ala 
Sayyidina Muhammadinw wa 'Ala Aali Sayyidina 
Muhammadin' is sufficient. 

(iv) The fourth blessing that one can earn on this 
day is that one must recite the Holy Book 
excessively on this day. Specially 'Soora-e- 
Kahaf must be recited on a Friday, its benefits 
and rewards are beyond contemplation. 
Virtually all the saints and holy men of Allah 
recite 'Soora-e-Kahaf without fail, on Friday. 
Some recite the following a thousand times 
each, on every 'Jumua'. 

(i) Soora-e-Ikhlas 

(ii) Darood Sharif 

(Hi) The third Kalima-e-Pak 

(v) The fifth boon is that one should say a lot of 
Nawafil on Friday. 

(A) It is in 'Hadith Sharif that if one says four 
•Rakaat' 'Namaz' and recites 'Soora-e-Fatiha' 
once and Soora-e-Ikhlas fifty times in each 



224 



Rakaat, he will be sent to Paradise. Also 
there are those who recite Soora-e-*Inaam\ 
Khaf Twaha' and 'Soora-e-Yaseen' in 
each Rakaat, on Friday. Alternatively some 
of them recite 'Soora-e-Laqman', «Sajda\ 
'rakaaf "* ,Soora - e - Mulk ' each 

(B) that Hazrat Abdu,Iah Bin Abbas 

(AUah be pleased with him) never missed 
performing 'Salatul Tasbeeh' (A special 
additional prayer of four rakaat in which the 
third Ka lima is recited seventy five times in 

famous* ^ Sta96SK ^ Prayer ^ Very 

ft ^advisable to definitely give 'Sadaqa' on 
Friday. Even a loaf of bread will do, if nothino 

week in t „e taC umb«nt a « olrs of ^ ,* e 
earning one's Mlhood, one sped* earmark 
this d ay ,„ .AakhW exclusively. Alfah hHT* 

'* * > J i M rtaf liji 

And when the Prayer is finished," dispel 
m the land, and seek Allah's bounty.... 

(62 : 10) 

apart from attending to the worldly order, things 



(vi) 



(vii) 



225 



like seeking the Urn', Meeting ones friends, praying 
respects to one's elders, enquiring after sick and joining 
the mourners of the dead is also included in it. 

The purpose of 'Namaz', and its intrinsic spirit 
have already been touched upon at some length vis a 
vis other matters bearing on the issue, It is obvious that 
these topics are rather expansive and as such can 
neither be summarily dismissed nor can they be fully 
covered by debate and discourse within the limited 
confines of this work. Hence it would be in fitness of 
things, if further queries, if any are referred to the 
'Ulema' for additional elucidation and answers. So, 
however remember that the 'waswasas' (Doubts, fears 
and conflicting emotions) in the 'Niyyat' or the 
intention of 'Namaz' are to be overcome right from the 
beginning. 

(i) Whether the man may not be sound of mind 

(ii) Or, he may even be a moron 

(iii) Or, on the matter he may not be aware of the 
stipulations of the faith, the 'Shariat' about it. 
The essence of the 'Niyyat' or the intention of 
the 'Namaz' lies in the way the man is mentally 
constituted i.e. in the manner he is wilfully 
disposed towards 'Namaz'. He should be fully 
conscious that he is standing before Allah 
before, whom he is present to say a particular in 
prayer. This is what exhorts a man to achieve 
the true spirit of 'Namaz'. 

Whether it be the prayers of 'Zuhr' or of 'Asr', 
what is required is that its text, it's Implications should 
be in his mind fully. As regards the heart being 'Hazir' 
i.e. present in his prayers, it is necessary that at the 



226 



time of meeting such a resolution of saying certain 
prayers, the *Namaz' should simultaneously concentrate 
on his devotion to the prayers. Having done this, he 
* should start his worship and say 'Allah-o-Akbar' and 
complete his prayers. In this simple way his self 
confidence would be so great, that if subsequently 
someone asks him if he has said his prayers, he would 
spontaneously, unhesitatingly reply 'Yes I have.' It is 
easier and uncomplicated. The man can thus gradually 
increase his 'Huzodr-e-Qaltf', the absorption of the 
heart in his prayers and be saved from many 'waswas'. 
No doubts and untoward thoughts would beset him. 

That is why, in the glorious days of the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
and His sahabas (Allah be pleased with them) the 
intent of the people for 'Namaz' used to be free from 
all kinds of 'waswasas' and wayward thoughts. 
Anything to the contrary is insensible. 

ZAKAT 

ZAKAT or compulsory contribution to the 
needy as per stipulations of Islam, is an essential 'Rukn' 
or element of the Faith. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said that the 
foundation of Islam is laid on its following five basic 
'Arkan' or elements, viz:- 

1. 'Kalema-e-Tayyaba' 

2. 'Namaz'.' 

3. 'Zakaf. 

4. 'Roza'. 

5. 'Haj'. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has also said that:- 



227 



A. Those people who possess gold and silver and 
do not give 'Zakat' from it as ordained by Allah, 
will have their chests stamped and fire-branded 
through and through to their backs. 

B. Likewise, those who possess the herds of cattle 
and in their lust for self want only refrain from 
paying Zakat will be severely hurt by the very 
animals that they used to swank about in life, 
on the Day of the Judgement. These animals 
would pounce upon them with their antlers 
gashing and wounding them, horn-madly, 
mercilessly. It would be a ghastly sight! 

' KINDS OF 'ZAKAT AND ITS MODE OF 
PAYMENT: Payment of 'Zakat' is applicable to 
animals, except as under: - 

(i) One is exempt from paying Zakat upto 4 
animals. 

(ii) If the animals are 'tended at home or in 
cattleyards whereby expenses are involved in 
their maintenance 'Zakat* is not leviable. 
Animals grazing on pastures outside are 
however subject to 'Zakat'. 

(iii) Some times such grazing animals cross over to 
other land and countries in search of grazing 
pastures. In such an eventuality, the 'Zakat' 
becomes 'Sakit' (is kept in abeyance) till they 
return to their own country. Thereafter when 
the herd returns back home, the automatic 'stay 
of Zakat' is vacated and the owner of the herd 
becomes liable to pay Zakat not only on this 
herd but also for the new born animals. 



228 



If the animals be a source of income to him, 
despite the fact that they grazed outside his house or 
cattleyard, he will have to pay 'Zakat' on their income. . 
On the contrary, if all or part of his herd is stolen or 
usurped by some tyrant, then no 'Zakat' will be 'Wajib' 
(due) on him. But if somehow he gets these animals 
back with profit, he will have to pay 'Zakat' in lieu on 
them, with retrospective effect. 

The most important fact to always keep in mind 
is that no matter how big or small such a herd, may be 
It's owner is not liable to pay any Zakat, if: 

a) He has no income from them. 

b) He is proportionally in debt. 

Such a person may look Tawangar or Ameer' 
(rich) but to all intents and purposes, he is a pauper, a 
debtor, a 'Faqir'. It is a sorry state to be in. 

Lastly a person has to pay 'Zakat' only when he 
becomes 'Sahib-e-Nisab' i.e. eligible to pay Zakat, not 
otherwise. Isjam does not burjden the faithful. 

I. The tariff of Zakat applicable to the animals is as 
follows: - 



Animals Possessed Zakat Payable Age of animal 



1. 
2. 
3. 



For 5 Camels/ 1 Goat . 
For 10 Camels • 2 Goats 
For 15 Camels 3 Goats 



upto 1 year 
upto 1 year 
upto 1 year 



229 

Or, a young steer i.e. He-goat of 2 years in allowed. 



4. For 25 Camels 

5. Till 35 Camels 

6. For 36 Camels 

7. For 46 Camels 

8. For 61 Camels 

9. For 76 Camels 

10. For 91 Camels 

11. For 121 Camels 



1 She-CameK 
1 She-Camel 
1 She-Camel 
1 She-Camel 

1 She-Camel 

2 She-Camels 

2 She-Camels 

3 She-Camels 



1 or 2 years old 

1 or 2 years old 

2 years old 

3 years did 

4 years old 

2 years old 

3 years old 
2 years old 



Subsequently, 'Zakat' payable is to be calculated as 
under :- 



1 additional She-Camel 



12. For additional 
Camels upto 40 
years old 

13. For additional Camels 

over 40 upto 50 1 additional She-Camel 3 
years old 

Just as no 'Zakat' is payable for possessing up to 4 
camels, likewise cows and oxen are also exempt from 
payment of Zakat upto a maximum of 29. The 
schedule of Zakat thereafter is as under: - 



Number of animals i.e. Zakat Age of the 

Cows & Oxen Possessed Payable Animal 



1. For 30 animals 1 calf or a ram 1 year old 

2. For 40 animals 1 calf or a ram 1 year old 

3. For 60 animals 2 calves or 1 year old 



After that the 'Zakat' payable is to be calculated as 



230 



follows: - 



4. For additional 



1 calf or 
a ram 
a calf or 
a ram 

1 goat 

2 goats 

3 goats 

4 goats 



animals upto 30 



1 year old 



5. For additional 



animals upto 40 

6. For 40 goats 

7. For 121 goats 

8. For 201 goats 

9. For 400 goats 



2 years old 
1 year old 
1 year old 
1 year old 
1 year old 



After that, for every additional 100 goats, one, 1 year 
old goat or one full grown 2 years old lamb is to be 
given as 'Zakat'. This rule will likewise apply to a joint 
holding of cattle by two persons. 



II, The second kind of 'Zakat' is on food grains. It 
is stipulated that if a person has 800 maunds of wheat, 
barley, dates or the like, viz any earth grown staple 
food including rice, pulses etc. considered essential diet 
for food requirements of man for his livelihood, then 
'Zakat' named 'Ushr' is applicable. Cotton and its 
woven texture, fruit dry or fresh are however not 
exempt from it. It is better to give dry dates and grapes 
in Zakat than fresh dates and grapes. One can not 
partake of eatables like wheat, dates, grapes etc. unless 
they fully ripen up and assume their ripe hue, before 
segregating the share of the 'Fuqara'. (Plural of Faqir 
i.e. poor, needy person) from them. 

III. The third kind of 'Zakat' is on gold and silver. 
It's schedule is as under:* 



1 . For 200 Silver Dirhams 5 dirham per annum 



231 



2. On 20 gold dinars 1/2 dinar per annum 

3. Onwards to be calculated on same proportion. 

Zakat is also valid on gold, silver utensils and 
ornaments etc., accordingly, including gold or silver 
sheathed articles like sword and ornamented maces 
etc. 

IV The fourth kind of 'Zakat' is on one's assets and 
profits, in trading and commerce. 

a) For instance if one buys some product worth 20 
dinars and does not sell it for a year, in that 
case he will have to pay Zakat on it, as under: - 

(i) On the original sum that remained invested 
for a year. 

(ii) And also on it's profit. 

b) 'Zakat' is to be calculated as such on all assets 
including gold and silver and also on profits 
accrued on yearly basis to be paid latest by the 
end of the year. 

However, according to one school of thought if 
a person has some capital or goods which he may 
replace with merchandise for the purposes of trade, in 
that case he will, not be liable to pay Zakat for it in the 
first part of the year on mere intention of doing so. 

In its book the beliefs of Imam Ghazali 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) (whose thinking was similar to that 
of Imam Shafai, on this subject) have been recorded. 
This is in all fairness to the followers of other schools of 



232 

opinion, especially to the 'Hanafi' school of thought 
whose opinion may differ from it. 

V. The fifth ldnd of 'Zakat' is the 'Fitrana' (Zakat or 
charity given on occasion of Idul Fitr i.e. the Day of 
Celebration and rejoicing after a month fasting during 
'Ramadhan'). It is equivalent to approximately 3 seers 
of the food grain one normally eats, per person of the 
household including the slaves. No 'Zakat* is however 
to be paid if the slaves, male or female may be non- 
believers or 'Kafir'. 

VITAL ASPECTS OF PAYING 'ZAKAT*: The 

following important aspects of 'Zakat' should be borne 
in mind. 

1. 'Zakat' can not be given at random. A dear 
'Niyyat' to this effect i.e. an intention to pay 
Zakat has to precede the act. 

2. If Zakat is to be disbursed through a 'Vakil' or 
an authorised agent then he is to be apprised 
clearly of the following:- 

a) The intent of the 'Zakat', 

b) The details of the Zakat to be paid, 

3. Zakat is a duty of singula* ^ importance. The 
sooner it is paid the better. One should not 
linger over it or delay it. The 'Sadqa-e-Fttr' or 
'Fitrana' as already described should also be 
promptly given to the deserving and the needy, 
rather than give it on the day of the 'Idul Fitr' or 
on the eve after the sighting of the moon. It is 
however much better, to give it during ' &e 
month of the 'Ramadan' but not before.it. * 



233 



The senior member of the family, the husband 
or wife can give the 'Fitrana' for self and the 
household. For more details you may consult ( 
your local 'Ulema'. 

(VI) According to the 'Shafai' (Imam Shaft's) school 
of thought:- 

A. 'Zakat for a year can be given in advance and 
reconciled later, after the expiry of the year. 
However, if the recepient of the 'Zakat' dies 
within the year, or becomes rich or Allah forbid 
if he changes his Faith, then the 'Zakat' will 
have to be given again by such 'Zakat' Guzar' 
(i.e. The person who gives 'Zakat'). 

B. That 'Zakat* should be paid in the same 'kind' in 
which the 'Zakat' is due. In other words it is not 
valid to say, give 'Zakat' for gold, silver, wheat, 
barley etc. in the shape of any other commodity 
or currency than in which it is due in all fairness 
'Zakat' should be given, to the local needy and 
the poor rather than send it to distant places. 
Naturally, one's neighbours and those in close 
proximity naturally have the first preference. 

According to Imam Shafai (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
all 'Male ZSktaf (All kinds of Zakat) like the currency, 
animals and other goods and commodities should be 
divided in to 8 Tabaqats' i.e. 8 classes and from each 
class 3 persons (or more but on equal bases) should be 
selected for this purposes. According to him. The 
following three categories of people are rather extinct. 



(i) The Ghazi's, 



234 



(ii) The new Muslims of dedicated heart towards 
Faith but meagre of means. 
* (Hi) The 'Ameleen-e-Zakat' (The person assigned to 
collect and deliver the 'Zakat'. 

Hence^Imam Shafai (Rahmatullah Alaih) is of 
the view that as the following five categories of people 
are readily available 'Zakat' should be distributed 
among them and three persons from each category 
should be selected to this effect, as stated earlier. As 
such fifteen persons from each area or locality will 
benefit from such distribution of 'Zakat'. It is based on 
the concept that total 'Zakat' should not be paid to a 
single person and that as many people of different 
needs and problems should receive its advantage. 

1. 'Fuqara' (The paupers including the alms 
seekers) . 

2. 'Masakeen' (Plural of 'Miskeen' i.e. the poor 
and needy). 

3. 'Makatib' (The slave girl or man who pays back 
to gain their freedom). 

4. 'Masafir' (The traveller or travellers in need, in 
travail far away from their home and hearth). 

5. . 'Maqrooz' (Those who are under the burden of 

debt). 

/D u Th lf L ,S the opinlon of Imam Shafai 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) who has himself confessed that 
this issue of the distribution of 'Zakat' and that of his 
considered view that the 'Zakat' of each kind should be 
paid in the same kind or commodity are very complex 
Hence there is room for difference of opinion as 
quite a few followers of Imam Shafai (Rahmatullah 



235 



Alaih) are said to follow the percepts of Imam Abu 
Hanifa (Rahmatullah Alaih), instead. 

THE EIGHT TABAQAT : THE EIGHT CLASSES: 

I. The first category is of the 'Fuqara' i.e. the 
'Faqirs', the paupers who do not possess 
anything. For them, to find means of livelihood 
is extremely difficult. They live from hand to 
mouth and suffer miserably. It is however said 
that a person who has clothes to wear and a 
day's meal to have is not a 'faqir'. However, if 
some one has insufficient clothes to wear i.e. he' 
is half clad and has half a days food for his 
subsistence, he is a 'faqir'. Similarly, a man in 
tatters with no tools to earn his living, is nothing 
short of a pauper, Specially when he does not 
know from where his next meal is going to 
come from. Likewise, a similarly placed student 
who has to foresake his scholarship to make 
both ends meet and keep the wolf out of the 
door is also a 'faqir', a pauper. 

Such people come to one's notice off and on. 
As far the instance of the above boy, it is better 
if he gets attached to a family, who may be able 
to subsidize hiro so that he may prosecute his 
studies and attain education. 

II. The second category or class is that of the 
'Masakin' (plural of Miskeen, the poor, the 
needy) . Rising from the rock bottom of virtually 
being a destitute as described earlier, the degree 
of poverty of people varies from person to 



236 



person or, from family to family. In this Tabaqa' 
viz in this class even that person is a 'Miskeen' 
who has the following status: - 

1) Lives on barest minimum. Is very frugal and 
thrifty. 

2) Has a humble home and household goods 
of modest kind. 

3) But despite his best efforts, his expenses are 
more than his meagre income and always 
has a short fall of funds specially towards 
the end of the year. 

The hardships he has to endure throughout 
due to his being poverty stricken makes him 
fully eligible to receive 'Zakat' to make both 
ends meet. 

III. The third category is that of the 'Amel-e-Zakat' 
(Person assigned to collect and distribute 
'Zakat'). How ironic that such a crucially placed 
person who may be poor and unable to state 
his condition, may go without it while 
performing his duties in the. same field. Such 
persons deserve to be unearthed and suitably 
compensated. 

IV. The' fourth class is of the deserving among the 
new arrivals, the new Muslims who have 
embraced Islam. Special attention should be 
paid to them to encourage them. 

V. The Ififth category is that of the 'Makatab' (i.e. 
the slave girl or man who pays back their 
master to achieve their freedom) : It is a worthy 



237 

cause. 

VI. The sixth class is that of the people who are 
burdened by debt. This is a sorry state to be in 
but among them such people are outstanding 
who become impecunious after borrowing 
money to quell some social disorder or bone of 
discord among the faithful. 

VII. The seventh Tabaqa' or category is of the 
Ghazis (The loyal fighters for the cause of faith). 
They are dedicated people of special kind. Their 
hearts are replete with the love of the 
conservation of their faith even at the cost of 
their lives. They abound in the 'Jazba-e-Jihad' 
(The spirit to fight for Allah). Therefore whether 
rich or poor they should be adequately 
compensated, at least for the expense of their 
tour de combat. 

VIII. The eighth category is that of the 'Musafirs' 
(way farers. Travellers). These people are liable 
to face a lot of hardship and travail in their 
journeys including that of shortage of funds 
while in transit, far away from their home and 
hearth. They are likely to carry their woes with 
them from place to place. Hence they need to 
be taken care of so that they are not stranded. 

'Zakat' can also be paid to an intending journey 
goer if his case be genuine. This applies specially to a 
Ghazi going for 'Jehad' or a 'Musafir' intending to start 
his travel for some noble cause. However if their tour 
is cancelled or postponed, the 'Zakat' paid to them can 
be transvalued and recovered. 



238 



THE MYSTIQUE OF 'ZAKAT: Just as 'Name*' (The 
Prayers) has a superficial form and the real spirit 
behind it, in the same manner the 'Zakat* too has its 
obvious infrastructure and it's real purpose. However 
what actually matters in it's spirit de force, its *Rooh\ It 
contains three outstanding mystiques. 

(0 To begin with, every breathing soul, every 
person is inspired by Allah. So, the servants of 
Allah, his human beings are expected to revere 
Him. What is more, it is also ordained by Allah 
to do so. For that matter there is no Muslim 
who may not claim to venerate Him. Hence we 
should all love Him above all things. Allah the 
Merciful has proclaimed. 

j j j ^ bi -j 

* ?>w a. a > r«a ^ ^ ^ 

: IjjJi) tf & 3 

Say, "If your fathers, your sons, your 
brothers, your wives, your clan, your 
wealth that you have acquired, commerce 
whose decline you fear, and dwellings you 
are pleased to have are dearer to you than 
Allah and His Messenger, and struggling in 
His way, then wait till Allah brings His 
command; Allah does not guide the 
transgressing people." (9:24) 

To claim to adore Allah is one thing but to 
substantiate the words with deeds is another. It is 



239 



easier said than done. That is why Allah puts the man 
to proof. He tests and examines his human beings in 
many ways. He is All knowing and is fully aware that 
the man also loves the 'Mall' (The wealth and worldly 
goods) . Hence, after giving the man the worldly assets, 
He tests him by seeing how sincerely the man 
responds to His dictate of paying 'Zakat' of his riches to 
the afflicted and the needy. 

The truth triumphs. Those who worship Allah 
devotedly with an intense reverence, react with abject 
obedience spontaneously whereas the misanthrope and 
the miserly fail miserably on account of their lust for 
money by super-imposing the love of the worldly 
attainments over the love of Allah. 

There are three prominent categories of such 
righteous people. 

(i) The first category is of the 'Siddiqeen' (Plural of 
'Siddiq'), the truest and staunchly devoted). 
Such are these people for whom the love of 
Allah is so pre-eminent, so imposingly sublime 
that to them nothing else matters. Their 
devotion knows no bounds. To them, to give 
away five Dirhams out of two hundred dirhams 
in 'Zakat' for Allah is to be measly and 
niggardly. They give away and sacrifice all that 
they possess for Him with a kindred heart, 
joyously. 

This is precisely what Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddique 
(Allah be pleased with him) the renowned 
companion of the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) did. That was 



240 



the day when people were gathered around the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) like the magnetised moths around 
the star, with their offerings. This singular 
foregathering included inter-alia other elite 
persons, the famous companion of the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) Hazrat Umar (Allah be pleased with him) 
who had brought half of his entire belongings 
with him. Then entered Hazrat Abu Bakar 
Siddique (Allah be pleased with him) 
accompanied with heaps of assortment of all 
sorts of things, until every one sitting there 
could instantaneously divine that there was 
nothing left, which a household did not contain. 
The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) was touched and asked him 
"what have you left behind at home for your 
family?" Hazrat Abu Bakar Siddique (Allah be 
pleased with him) humbly answered. "There is 
nothing left with us except the Allah and His 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him)!" Thereupon the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
remarked: 

- £Jj& U Jf U CJk^j 

"The exalted status of both of you varies 
according to the magnitude of your noble 
acts." 

(ii) Then come the 'Saliheen' (Plural of Salih, a 
pious and righteous person). Not every body can be a 
'Siddique'. It is a very lofty status. Nevertheless, as the 



241 



Name suggests these 'Saliheen' are people of elevated 
position in their own right. They have fear of Allah in 
their hearts. They worship Him with a devoted heart, 
are simple, pious and righteous by nature. People of 
the kind who an example of good faithfulness for 
others. They may not have much to offer to those in 
distress" but they feel for them, go without many 
worldly comforts to collect whatever they can and give 
all that they have accumulated, selflessly in the name 
of Allah. At times, they remain like the 'faqir' remain 
in want or need of a thing as far as they can help. For 
them Allah's happiness also lies in seeking His favours 
by serving His people. Such are these people, that if 
they have the wherewithal to do so, they give far more 
than the 'Zakat' due to them, with a generous heart, at 
times at the cost of great personal inconvenience and 
cold comfort to their family. For them a destitute or a 
fellow in sore need of aid and succour is like a 
suffering member of their own family. They look after 
him whole heartedly. They would rather go without it 
themselves rather than let a hungry person go without 
food. 

The third category is of those people who can 
barely afford to give five dirhams out of two hundred 
dirhams. However, when they give 'Zakat', they do so 
with a staid heart, in humble obedience to Allah, their 
brows unfurrowed. They try to pay their 'Zakat' to the 
deserving quickly, without in any way purporting to be 
doing any favour to them. They do so sincerely and 
gracefully. This is the last stage of the good-doers but a 
worthy one, as their hearts ace in the right place. 

Indeed, such a person is amongst the most 



242 

unfortunate who can easily afford to give more than 
five dirhams out of two hundred but wantonly fails to 
do so out of a mean, niggardly stinginess. When love 
of money supercedes the love of Allah, such a miserly 
person becomes a protoplasm of shallowness, is 
generally disliked by people and can never become a 
friend of Allah. Such 'BukhP (Meanness: Stinginess) 
grows out of contemptuous lust of worldly wealth and 
desire. 

The secret of man's welfare therefore lies in 
purifying the heart of such fihh which defiles a person's 
being so metamorphically that it is not possible to 
ascribe any virtue to it. Just as visible dirt automatically 
withholds one from saying his prayers in such a state, 
similarly a heart polluted by such evil characteristics can 
not hope for any redemption. Therefore the sooner a 
man cleanses his heart by being charitable towards his 
fellow beings by giving 'Zakat' in the name of Allah, 
the better it is for him, for Zakat cleans the dirt out of 
the heart of man as water cleans all impurities from his 
person. 

There is only one outstanding exception to it, to 
wit, to Allah forbid conceive of giving 'Zakat' to the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) or his family. It is a liberty and felony of the first 
order. It is strictly forbidden (Is 'Haram'), lest by such 
bespattered offerings, aspersious be cast on such 
supremely pious and exalted beings, ordained above 
all such things. 

Lastly, one should count one's blessings, and 
thank the Almighty for each souvenir granted. In it lies 



243 



the mystique of man's betterment. Precisely, as the 
worldly bounties bestowed by Allah are a source of 
happiness for man in this world and In the hereafter 
and he expresses his gratitude to Him by saying his 
prayers, by fasting in the 'Ramadan' and by performing , 
'Haj' (Holy pilgrimage to Makkha to the House of 
Allah) in thanks giving for his physical well being; 
(which also extols his spiritual self) in the same manner 
the 'Zakat' is the symbol of the expression of man's 
being indebted to Allah the Merciful, for his physical, 
bodily state of being blessed by health and wealth. 
Such a person who gives 'Zakat* for Allah also 
introspects and thanks Him for His dual favour by 
having granted him worldly assets and comforts which 
others, to whom he is giving 'Zakat' do not possess. 
While his heart bleeds for them he also simultaneously 
expresses his profound gratitude to Allah for not 
having placed him in their position and predicament. 
He thankfully realises that it could be vice versa viz he 
could be the recepient rather than the giver of the 
'Zakat'. 

This is the astute thinking of the sages who 
know how to evaluate things sanely. A wise man 
realises that this may be an examination, a test by 
Allah. Summum bonum a grateful person is a God 
loving person. Allah likes him for it. Such are the 
people who are angels in mercy for the mankind. 
Their offerings, their 'Zakat', their assistance is always 
spontaneous, unsolicited and generous. They 
understand the spirit, the 'Rooh' of 'Zakat'. Most of 
them distribute 'Zakat' with such a noble demeanour, 
with such heart warming humility that it's recepients 
are touched by their gestures of selfless charity for 



244 



Allah. That is a lasting lesson for a person in this 
world, for the good of this world and the next, by 
paying need to it. 

THE ADAAB: THE POSTULATES OF ZAKAT. 

Giving 'Zakat' for Allah is an expression of paying most 
faithful and dutiful worship to Allah. Hence, one who 
desires that his supplicant adoration paid to Allah in 
His reverence is blessed with His mercy and that his 
prayers do not remain superficial, dead and dormant 
then it is adviseable that he should model his life on 
the following seven points, particularly in reference to 
the subject under advisement i.e. the 'Zakat'. 

I. The man should be zealous in paying Zakat. His 
favour should be so .marked that he should 
unabatedly seek opportunities to render 
charitable assistance to the needy, even before 
the term of the year. It will benefit him in three 
ways. 

A. His persistent anxiety to this effect will 
render his prayers more soulful. It is 
obvious that a dedicated person who 
attends to his assignments with his heart 
and soul, cherishes his charge, goes ahead 
regardless of any fear of shortfalls, is always 
highly esteemed by his master. And when 
the master be Allah the Merciful, the All 
knowing, He blesses such a person with 
such rich rewards of this world and the 
hereafter that such a person becomes heads 
and shoulders above others. 

B. The second advantage that instantaneously 



245 



accrues to such an «rdent person by nature 
is that he keeps on coming to the aid and 
succour of the suffering humanity 
irrespective of whether it is the beginning, 
the middle or the later part of the year. It 
results in his being able to reach the people 
in hardship in the nick of time. His sudden 
appearance as their guardian angel gives a 
pleasant surprise to the paupers (The 
'fuqara') . He assuages their sufferings. Their 
hearts warm up to him. Hence, they pray 
for him from the core of their heart. These 
elegant prayers become a lasting boon for 
him and so to say serve him as a protective 
wall around him against all dangers. 

C. Such an earnest person is always on the 
look out for people in distress. His habit of 
rushing forward to render help to people in 
distress makes him steal a march over 
others. He has an edge over those who 
wait till the end of the year to pay their 
'Zakat'. 

Life is not a bed of roses. It is hard and self 
imposing. There is many a slip between the cup and 
the lip. By having done his best already due to his 
devotion to Allah and his generous temperament, he 
forestalls the unforeseen eventuality when he may not 
be in a position to pay his Zakat timely and also as 
such pre-empts the Satan to stand in his way. 

"Verily, the heart of a believer is in 



246 



between the two fingers of the 
Beneficent." 

According to a parable, a saintly person 
suddenly thought of giving the rather fine dress that he 
was wearing to some needy person, while in the toilet. 
He came out immediately and apprised his disciple of 
his intention, changed and gave him the apparel. The 
disciple respectfully stated that he could have waited a 
while in toilet before doing so. He replied that he had 
hurried up instinctively so that the charitable thought 
conceived by him may hot be undone somehow or be 
supervened by later considerations. 

II. However, if a person can not be prompt in the 
performance of his pious instincts and duties, it 
would be better if he pays his 'Zakat' in the 
month of 'Muharam' which is not only the first 
month of the year but is also a consecrated 
month. Alternatively he can give the 'Zakat' in 
the holy month of 'Ramadan'. If he does so he 
will get more 'Sawab' (reward) for it. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) was the most generous of all. He 
always gave away every thing in charity, most 
of all during the month of 'Ramadan'. 

III. Thirdly, the practice of doing good by stealth is 
always the best. 'Zakat' should also be given 
quietly, without revealing it to any one, in such 
a manner that its recepient may not feel any 
awkwardness or humiliation for his poverty. His 
false ego would also be suppressed at the same 
time. Allah likes such humility and sincerity of 



247 



purpose. 

It is stated in the 'Hadith' that if a man gives his 
'Zakat' secretly, it cools down the IRE of Allah and that 
a just being and the person who gives his 'Sadaqa' 
(charity) with his right hand so discreetly that his left 
hand does not come to know of it, will be amongst the 
seven uniquely blessed by Allah. They will be stationed 
on a high pedestal under the 'Arsh' (The celestial 
heavenly sphere) of Allah. The intention behind charity 
is of the essence. It is also in the 'Hadith' that:- 

A. As aforementioned, the charity given 
surreptitiously and discreetly, in a decent 
manner will be recorded in the 'Book of 
Honour'. 

B. In comparison, however well meant, the charity 
that tan not be concealed will be registered as a 
good worldly deed of merit but of a secondary 
accomplishment. 

C. Vice versa, the so called 'Sadaqa' (charity) 
distributed with publicity and much also will be 
separately recorded as an evil deed to the man's 
detriment as a vain, pompous act of self- 
applause. That is why, though rather 
hyperbolic, the seniors and the saints of the 
olden days used to adopt strange methods of 
secrecy and disguise. The following instances 
are glaring. 

i) Some of them used to give 'Zakat' quietly 
to a blind person and hurriedly walk away. 

ii) Some used to privily throw the packet 



248 

containing the 'Zakat' money in to the 
houses of the 'Faqirs'. 

Hi) Instances are narrated that they used to 
quietly knot up the 'Zakat' money in the 
dangling robe or garb of a sleeping needy 
and run away. 

Evidently all this was being done out of a deep 
rooted sense of delicacy and conslderateness for the 
person receiving the Zakat. 

The most notable effect of giving 'Zakat' is that 
one overcomes outrageous traits like meanness and 
miserliness. On the other hand by publicising its 
distribution openly the Satan finds it's prey, pumps the 
man's ego and makes him subject to *Riya' (duplicity of 
conduct concietedness). While stinginess is like a 
scorpion, the duplicity and self-conceitedness is akin to 
a serpent. Both are poisonous and deadly. Of course, 
the snake is more dangerous than a scorpion since the 
snakes have been seen to swallow the scorpions in a 
gulp and thus become even more venomous. 

Such depraved traits degrade a person to the 
lowest depths of human degeneration. When he dies 
the impact on his heart, in the grave will be 
correspondingly that of the scorpion or the snake, as 
already described in previous chapters. In nutshell, 
advertised charity is more harmful than beneficial. 

IV. If a person is not an imposter. Has no 'Ria' in 
him and finds that his heart is absolutely dear of 
all considerations of. self display and is of the 



249 



opinion that if he distributes 'Zakat' openly 
before others they too may be tempted to 
follow suit and give charity, then he can do so 
under these extenuating conditions. 
Undoubtedly, when the sincerity of purpose of a 
person is pronounced, he rises above all petty 
considerations of what the others will think of 
him. Hence, when such a person gives 'Zakat' 
to people in broad day light, most likely the 
noble glow of humility, sincerity and piousness 
reflected on his face and in his conduct will 
register with the people and have a positive 
effect on them. 

V. The 'Sadaqa' (charity) or 'Zakat' is to be given 
to Allah's beings, in the name of Allah out of 
what a man is blessed with by Allah. Hence for 
a man to act highhandedly with people, 
flaunting his riches and wealth on them, 
behaving as if he is doing a favour to them is 
tantamount to deriding the deprived. It amounts 
to countermanding the dictates of Allah. By 
behaving in such a horridly haughty manner, 
the man not only wastes his 'Sadaqah' (Plural of 
sadaqa. charity) but also invites Allah's wrath. 

( T 1 1 : 5 v ^i'lllj J>Ju jt&fci* lJ 

Do not render vain your offerings with 
reproach and injury.... (2 : 264) 

'Aza' in Arabic means to hurt, disgrace or ridicule some 
one. The aforementioned people hurt and disgrace 
others, as under:- 



250 



(i) By adopting a laughty demeanour, eyebrows 
furrowed with the needy. 

(ii) They speak rudely to the seekers of 'Zakat'. 

(iii) They display their superiority over the poor by 
word and pass adverse remarks on their sorry 
predicament. It hurts the feelings of these 
people in distress to the extent sometimes, that 
they can not help but react sharply to such 
atrocious and uncalled for behaviour. They cry 
and curse themselves and exclaim 'Oh! only it 
we were not in such dire straits. Otherwise this 
man would not have dared to come to us and 
degrade us in this fashion!' Yet such a self 
centred person does not mend his ways. He 
does not realise that he is doomed to 
destruction. He had better bring home to his 
better judgement that:- 

(a) Such behaviour is stupid. It makes people hate 
him. 

(b) That a 'Faqir* or an ascetic that he looks down 
upon is poor but he is humble, sedate and 
pious. Thus he is reaver to Allah than a tyrant 
like him. 

(c) That Allah likes Taqr* (Asceticism) (Being 
simple and contented faithful) more than 
Tawangari', the worldly riches. It therefore 
behaves a person who has been given more by 
Allah that he should be more benevolent 
towards the needy and the poor. 

(vi) Actually what normally happens is that the 
wealthy, the affluent get so fascinated by their 
worldly attainments that they forget the purpose 



251 



of their life. They become totally oblivious to the 
pain and sufferings of those for whom life 
becomes a long stretch of agony due to want 
and hunger. During the course of time they 
tend to become hard hearted and rather than 
take pity on them, they become prone to 
disapprove of them and degrade them. They go 
astray. 

To give 'Zakat' to a person and treat him as a 
personal servant and take work from him menacingly 
in lieu is treacherous. This is what these wretches do. 
They treat them as serfs and want them to fawn on 
them all the time. On the contrary, in the hearts of 
their heart these 'Zakat Guzars' (Zakat givers) should 
be grateful to them for having provided them the 
opportunity to serve them, to please Allah. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has also said that the Sadqa or charity 
given, first goes to the Blessed Hands of Allah and 
then to the 'Faqir' or the needy recepient of it. Hence, 
if the Taqir' is so extolled, then the 'Zakat Guzar (one 
who gives 'Zakat') should be extremely grateful to him. 

These are the inner implications and the secrets 
of giving charity and 'Zakat'. When a man becomes 
alive to then hidden mystiques of Sadaqa and Zakat 
(charity) , he comes to know:- 

(« That it is very uncharitable and unkind to give 
charity and act as if he is doing a personal 
favour to it's recepient. 

(ii) That he should keep the lofty spirit of his elders 



252 



of the olden days in mind who believed in 
giving 'Zakat' to people surreptitiously so that:- 

A. They may not be embarrased or feel 
humiliated. 

B. He himself may not fall a prey to the Satan 
and become a self assertive sadist. 

On the contrary, if he has to give 'Zakat' to 
anybody, he should treat him as his superior, 
behave as if he has come to ask for a favour 
and act as if the receiver of 'Zakat' would be 
doing him a good turn if he accepts his humble 
offering. In this process when the recepient 
condescends to take the 'Zakat' money, he 
should be humility personified, keep his hand 
abase, so that the receiver's hand may remain 
ligher than his and he may pick up the money 
from it, as one would, a gift. 

"An upper hand is better than a lower 
hand." 

To pronounce 'Zakat' as a favour to somebody is to 
denounce the spirit of charity which goes to the hands 
of Allah first. 

It is related that whenever Hazrat 'A'isha 
Siddiqa (Allah be pleased with her) sent some 
alms to the poor she used to do so as if it was a 
souvenir and used to instruct it's presenter to 
remember this. She used to at the same time 
tell him to make it a point to remember the 



253 



words of the receiver's blessings so that in 
gratitude she may also be able to pray for him 
accordingly and the charity offered may remain 
untouched as a gem. 

Tautologically, a prayer may be a blessing but in 
this case one should know not to extend his 
hands in giving charity so that he may be 
blessed for it. That he always is the case but the 
fact remains that actually it is the 'Faqir' the* 
recepient of the 'Zakat' who is the benefactor for 
having accepted it and he himself is it's 
consequent beneficiary. Hence, in fact it is the 
given of 4 Zakat' who should be in gratitude to 
him and should as such pray for him who has 
been instrumental in conferring this blessing on 
him. 

(vii) The seventh important aspect of 'Zakat' or 
charity is that at the time of rendering such a 
service for Allah one should remember the 
following :- 

A. That the thing proffered as such should be 
of good quality. 

B. It should be offered with grace. 

C. It should be 'Halal' (Pure and valid) and 
above all suspicion. 

Allah, the Graceful is Pure. Therefore anything 
insipid and contrary to the above can not be a source 
of nearness to Him. Allah has accordingly proclaimed 
that:- 



254 



But do not intend to expend the dirty stuff 
out of it; you would not take it, except that 
you close an eye on it.... (2 : 267) 

The point can be further rubbed in by the fact 
that it never happens that a guest is offered the inferior 
things and the superior ones are retained at home for 
the use and consumption of the household. Then how 
come that one should act inversely for Allah! Therefore 
if there vital points are borne in mind, one can never 
falter or fail. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) has also said that "Sometimes one 
dirham given in charity supercedes a thousand dirhams 
given in the same cause." So, again, it is the spirit of 
the matter that counts. 



THE SEARCH FOR THE TUQARA': THE 
PAUPERS OR ASCETICS 

A person who gives 'Zakat' in a every trade for 
his betterment in the 'Aakhirat' (The Hereafter). In 
doing so, while the 4 Zakat* of a person is fulfilled by 
giving it to any needy person, it is nevertheless much 
better if it is proffered to the most needy of them 
amongst any of the following five categories of the 
Tuqara' (Plural of faqir i.e. a pauper: Also applied to 
mean a saint or an ascetic of meagre means). 

I. The first quality that such a needy person 
should possess is that he should be a righteous 



255 



and a pious person. The Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) has also 
said. 

. *LiTd> yj^t 
"Feed the pious with your food." 

Giving charity to such a person tantamounts to almost 
becoming a partner in the piety and prayers of such an 
unblemished person. 

There is a parable to this effect that a certain 
king always gave charity to the 'Soofia' 
(Ascetics) (Plural of 'Soofi', a pure and pious 
person known for his staunch worship). It is 
related that he used to say that he does so 
because he knows that such people are always 
engrossed in their prayers and worship of Allah. 
Hence he does not want them to be least 
deterred by the worldly pursuits of finding the 
means to exist in life, lest their attention should 
be diverted from such a holy course. When this 
fact came to the notice of Khawja Junaid 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) he praised the king and 
said "He who tries to befriend the friends of 
Allah ultirrtately himself becomes a friend of 
Allah himself." 

Also, during the times of Khawja Junaid 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) a green grocer who was a 
pious person became a virtual pauper on 
account of his generous nature whereby he was 



256 



reduced to such a pitiable state, since he used 
to go out of his way to help the 'Fuqara' in 
distress by giving them vegetables when they 
were hungry. Khawja Junaid (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) was touched by it, gave him some funds 
for his shop, raised his hands in profound 
prayer for him and told him that God willing, in 
future he will never be in such a peril. 

II. The same principle applies to a poor but fervid 
scholar who may not be able to prosecute his 
studies due to shortage of funds. If he is 
provided the means to do so i.e. if he is given 
'Zakat', he will be able to fulfil his craze for 
knowledge and education. Otherwise his zeal 
for learning will be badly blunted, will suffer 
agonies and remain illiterate for which he will 
lament over his misfortune for the rest of his 
life. 

III. In the third category falls that person whose 
selfrespect makes him camouflage his poverty. 
He wears clean dress and does not utter a word 
about the status he is in. Such people are rare 
but it is about these people that it is stated in 
the Holy Book by Allah that:- 

(TVf : W) t iAii^^^g.^ 

The ignorant think them rich because of 
modesty.... (2 . 273) 

Such are the elite amongst the deserving who manage 
to conceal their honest poverty by dignity, patience 
and fortitude. Grit is their prominent virtue. By an 



257 



understatement, it is considerate to give their 
preference over a professional beggar. 

IV. A poverty stricken family man, specially if he 
has many- mouths to feed deserves special 
consideration. In this fourth class also come the 
sick, the perpetually ailing and the invalid 
persons. Their feasibility for 'Zakat' is self- 
explanatory. 

V. A near relation in want is the next one in the 
fifth category. His condition is hardly ever 
hidden from his kith and kin. Hence to come to 
his rescue timely doubles the 'Sawab' (Reward) 
of helping him with 'Zakat'. There may however 
also be people who may not be related to a 
person by family ties but may be as close to him 
as a men of his own clan because of their novel 
love for Allah. Then too it devolves on that 
man to treat them as such, hold together with 
them and render them all assistance he can. It 
will not only be very rewarding for him due to 
the receiver's good wishes for him but will also 
strengthen the ties of brotherhood between 
them. The man would at the same time be glad 
that there was no 'Bukhl' (stinginess, meaness of 
temperament) in him. He would be further 
pleased that he was able to stand his worthy 
friends in good stead. 

'Saadaat' (People from the family and lineage of 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) are nevertheless exempt from 'Zakat'. Zakat 
should also not be paid to the non believers, idolators 



258 



and 'Khafirs'. It is the right of the Muslims. 

THE 'ADAAB' OR PRINCIPAL TRAITS OF THE 
RECEIVER OF ZAKAT 

Allah has every kindly endowed some persons 
with prosperity, valuable possessions and riches 
whereas some of his beings are poor, possessing little 
or nothing, are without means, needy and deficient in 
worldly requirements. Some of them are paupers. It is 
therefore the duty of the rich to look after such poor 
people but not necessarily to the extent of the 
compulsory contribution of the 'Zakat' prescribed 
(which is the basic minimum) but commensurate with 
their possessions and wealth. In it lies their betterment. 
In a way the poor are blessed by Allah in so much that 
not having the wherewithal to do so they do not 
remain occupied in the worldly worries of amassing 
wealth like the resourceful rich, hence, in their honest 
poverty they remain akin to Allah praying most of the 
time in their platitude.. 

Some of them are men of God, who remain 
absolved of all other cares except that of the worship 
of Allah. The rich are thus entrusted by Allah to take 
care of them so that nothing impedes them in their 
devoted worship. They in turn should accept succour 
and aid to the tune of their requirements so that they 
are able to continue their prayers, undisturbed and 
should also put in a good word for them in their 
thanks giving and adoration paid to Allah. It is like a 
king admiring some selected servants so much as to 
like them to remain at his beck and call all the time. 
They are rewarded likewise. 



259 



I have not created jinn and men but to 
serve Me. (51 : 56) 

Therefore while accepting monetary help, the 
'Fuqara' (Ascetics) should remember that:- 

(i) Although the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
„of Allah be upon him) has stated that the 

person who gives charity has no superiority over 
the person who takes it, such an offering is to 
be accepted by 'Fuqara' (Ascetics) only for the 
purpose of uninterrupted meditation and 
worship of Allah. 

(ii) At the same time such elite 'Fuqara' should 
consider that they are receiving the charitable 
help from Allah through His 'Moakkal* 
(Appointed agent) whereby the rich donator has 
been assigned specifically to do so by Him so 
that they may remain in His solemn service. 
This is what is willed by Allah for such 
enlightened people. It is in the 'Hadith' that:- 

"One who is not grateful to the people is 
also not grateful to Allah." 

When these virtuous persons see how their Creator 
subsidizes them, they bow down in gratitude to Him. 



(ii :>) 



260 



How excellent a servant! He was a 
penitent. (38 : 44) 

Allah the Merciful has further proclaimed. 

He was truthful and a Prophet. (19 : 41) 

So Great is Allah that when He makes somebody a 
source of clemence and delight for others He grants 
him great elegance and an eminent status. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has said that: - 

"Blessed is he who has been created to do 
all good and good has been made easy to 
his hands." 

It is therefore vital for people to recognise the true 
worth and the exalted stature of such friends of Allah, 
regard and respect them, for, in it lies the thanks 
giving due to Allah. In turn the 'Fuqara' should say the 
following prayer for their serving assistants in mercy. 

•u* J dlk* Jr>j fj$\ o'jtf j'd&'&\'& 

- ^ c/> 'J aril > J* j jifth 

"May Allah purify thy heart among the 
hearts of the virtuous and purify thy act 
among the acts of the goodly people and 
may Allah send blessings on Thy spirit • 
among the spirit of the martyrs." 



261 



It is transcribed in the 'Hadith' that a good turn should 
be repaid by a good turn. If one can't do so he should 
at least pray adequately for him. Likewise it is 
incumbent upon the man giving 'Zakat' to treat it as a 
humble offering to the receiver, so matter how larger it 
may be. Similarly, the recepient of 'Zakat' should be 
above all considerations of the quantum of 'Zakat' 
offered, irrespective of how meagre it may be. It is the 
spirit behind such an act that matters and not the sum 
submitted in charity. 

(Hi) Thirdly, the recepient should never accept any 
thing that is unacceptable according to the 
dictates of the faith (Haram). Likewise he 
should never entertain any charity or gift from a 
tyrant or a usurer, for obvious reasons. 

(iv) It also behaves such people of merit to not to 
take more than they actually need. 

a) For instance if journey or voyage is intented 
to be undertaken by them the amount 
accepted should not surpass their 
requirement of fair and the expenses in 
transit including the cost of reaching their 
destination. 

b) In the same manner not a dirham more 
should be accepted than what is actually 
required for the maintenance of their 
family, at a time. Also to agree to receive 
any assistance, in the presence of some 
funds or things available to subsist on at 
home, is 'Haram' (not allowed) . 



262 



(v) Lastly, as per Imam Shafai (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
who believed in not giving the total 'Zakat' to a 
single person, the receiver should ask the given 
before accepting it, if he (the recepient) pertains 
to the same category for which the charity is 
meant. Otherwise he should decline to take it. 

(A controversial issue between the 'Ulema', 
according to Imam Shafai (Rahmatullah Alaih) there 
should be eight distinct categories of the recepients of 
Zakat, as aforementiond) . 

THE TAZAIL' I.E. THE VIRTUES OF 'ZAKAT 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said "Give Zakat even if it be half a 
date. If it is not possible, at least be genuinely 
sympathetic to the man in distress. It also falls in the 
same category. He has also said that:- 

A. "Allah looks after you, as you do your favourite 
animals. Hence look after others with love." 

B. "Depending upon the spirit it is given in, a few 
drops of dates offered in 'Zakat* can be more 
than the mount 'Uhad' (A sacred mountain 
where the famous battle of 'Uhad' was fought. 
The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) was also present)." 

C. "Till the moment of reckoning, each person 
shall rest under the shade of his 'Sadaqa' on the 
Day of the Judgement." 

D. "Seventy doors of a city get ram-closed if its 
inhabitants don't give Sadaqa or Zakat". 



263 

E "Charity should be given when one is in the 
prime moments of his life. It is the best. To give 
'Sadaqa' when a man is in distress or about to 
die is an other thing." 

"That man will remain in Allah's protection till 
such time as it's receiver wears the garments donated 
by him." The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings ot 
Allah be upon him) used to perform his abolutions 
personally and used to give His 'Sadaqa or Zakat with 
his own hands. 

Likewise, Prophet 'Isa' (The Holy Christ) (peace 
of Allah be upon him) said the angels of mercy shall 
never enter that house for seven days from where a 
seeker is returned empty handed by its inmates. 

Once, Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa (Allah be pleased 
with her) gave away fifty thousand dinar in 'Sadaqa' 
whole she remained with patched clothes on. She 
could have gone in for new clothes easily but she did 
not do so. 

Hazrat Abdullah bin Masood (Allah be pleased 
with him) has narrated that an erstwhile holy man 
remained engrossed in prayers and worship for long 
but after that happened to commit such a heinous 
blunder that all his worship and venerated service were 
wasted away in the twinkling of an eye. He kept on 
begging Allah's pardon for his transgression day in and 
day out but to no avail, until he saw a 'Faqir' who was 
dying of hunger and gave him a loaf of bread 
Thereupon Allah the Merciful forgave him and he u 
restored to his former status. 



264 

The great sage and philosopher 'Luqman' once 
gave advice to his son and told him that he hopes and 
prays that it never happens but if ever some serious sin 
gets committed by him in life, he should repent, relent 
and immediately give 'Sadaqa'. 

Hazrat Abullah bin Masopd (Allah be pleased 
with him) is reported to have always given sugar in 
'Sadaqa' because it was dear to him, as per the 
following verse of the Holy Book. 

You will not attain virtue until you expend 
of that you love.... (3 :92) 

Summum bonum, as long as the person who 
gives the 'Sadaqa' or 'Zakat' does not consider himself 
humbler and worse off than it's recepient and his 
gratitude towards its taker is not profound, he will not 
get any 'Sawab' (reward) for it. 

Hazrat Imam Hassan Basari (RahmatuJIah Alaih) 
once saw a rather strikingly beautiful slave girl He 
wanted to buy her off and set her free. He enquired of 
the slaver, if he would sell her to him for two dirhams 
The slave merchant declined, upon which Hazrat 
Hassan Basari (Rahmatullah Alaih) exclaimed. "Why 
so exhorbitant? Allah gives 'Hoor-e-Ain' (The 
postulated most beautiful maidens of Paradise) to His 
people for far less. The subtle reference was to 'Zakat'. 

'ROZA': FASTING 



keep a 'Roza' means to fast. It applies 



265 



particularly to the Holy month of 'Ramadan'. The Holy 
'Qur'an' was ordained in this consecrated month in the 
Islamic calendar. Hence fasting in Ramadan has a 
special significance for Muslims. They look forward to it 
and wait for it anxiously. 

Fasting in Ramadan is accordingly one of the 
principal basic 'Arkan', the elements of Islam. The 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of AUah be upon 
him) has elucidated its importance as under: - 

A. 'That when Allah is pleased, He grants the 'Ajr', 
the reward of a good deed done seven to seven 
hundred times more than its worth but as the 
'Roza' is singularly for Allah, He bestows 
inconceivable blessings one whosoever fasts for 
Him by giving sacrifice of abstinence from his 
basic human needs of eating, drinking and 
conjugating with his spouse. He and He only 
can do so.' 

Surely the steadfast will be paid their 
wages in full without reckoning. (39 : 10) 

B. 'That the odour from a 'Rozadar's mouth is 
better than and more sweet smelling than 
musk.' — „ 

C. 'That while the 'Patience in adversity' is as good 
in man as half of his 'Iman' (Firm conviction in 
Faith), the 'Roza' tantamounts to the Half of 



266 



such praise worthy 'Patience'. 

D. That even when a 'Rozadar' (one who fasts for 
Allah) is reclining in rest, asleep with 'Roza', it 
tantamounts to being in worship. Also his 
breathing the while is sanctified like the saying 
of a rosary. 

E. His solicitous prayers verge on automatic 
acceptance. 

F. The following happens with the advent of 
'Ramadan'. 

(i) The entrance doors of the Paradise are laid 
open for the righteous. 

(ii) The gates of Hell are barricated. 

(iii) The 'Shiyateen' i.e. the Satan and his 
disciples are chained up and heavily 
shackled. 

(iv) A heralding voice starts exhorting the good- 
doers to be up and doing and hurry up. At 
the same time it restrains the evil-doers to 
give up their mischief mongering and 
'stirring the strife' between the faithful. 

Such grand virtue is invested in the 'Roza\ As 
already stated, in His Sublime Mercy, Allah has 
directed all Its attributes to Himself and proclaimed 
that:- 

"The fasting is for Me and I am its 
reward." 

So much so that the pre-eminence of fasting vis a vis 
other prayers, worship and faithful service can be 



267 



exemplified by comparing a mosque to the Grand 
MosZe of the Khana-e-Kaaba' (The House o God) 
whose vertex Is dearer to Allah The virtues Implied 



are:- 



I The true worth of fasting (The 'Roza') lies in 
fasting for the sake of Allah with one's heart 
and soul. For that one has to dispel all debased 
and sensual thoughts from one's heart. This is 
an internal struggle of a very high order. As 
such, it becomes a matter of the 'Batin', of the 
soul Only he and His Allah know of what is 
transpiring. People have no inkling about it. The 
verity of 4 Roza' becomes sublime. There is truth 
and truth only. There is no hypocircy or 

showing off. , 1 lL 

II Secondly the very fact that Allah says that the 
'Roza' is exclusively for Him, shows how 
pleased He is about it. 

It is so for its underlying mystique i. e. as every 
one knows the Satan is the arch enemy of Allah. And 
ironically the man's carnal desires are actually his 
'Lashkar', his marauding army. So when the Rozadar 
fortifies himself with 'Roza', he defeats the evil forces of 
Allah's foes and emerges as an elegant fighter and 
victor for Allah. Hence Allah showers his unique 
blessings on him. 

For the same reason the Holy Prophet's saying 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon^him) is oft 
epeated that the Satan courses through the veins of a 
nSlike blood circulates in the arteries of man. So, 
2SS» down with hunger. Don't allow him free 



268 



S7su?ir and blessinss ° f ^ ah be 



"Fasting is a shield." 

Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa (Allah be pleased with 
reply. With hunger." The Holy Prophet f Deac< » * n w 

w?s tt A d ,,ah be r n 

that h, ParadlSe - lt ls a ,e ^ n dary saying 

that hunger kills the desires of man whereas a hearty 
meal taken, at times, makes a man forget hi! 

THE 'FRAIZ- OF R02A: THE ESSENTIAL 
ELEMENTS OF FASTING 

fasting ?Rola ! " 9S " ^ ^ ^ !n 

(I) The first one is the sighting of the moon of the 
month of 'Ramadan 1 . The month can be of 
twenty nine or thirty days. One reliable witness 
of it Is sufficient while for the sighting of the 
moon of «Eid\ (The day of rejoicing after the 

S ttf" ° f ?* T* ° f Ramadan cal,e d the 
•S v **'° r * h * of ^^bration consequent on 
Haj called the Bdul Azha') the evidence of 
two dependable persons is necessary. 

(A) A person who hears from a trustworthy 



269 



man that the 'Ramadan' moon has been 
sighted does not have to go the 'Qazi' (The 
dispencer of justice: The Judge, according 
to Islamic jurisprudence) for its 
confirmation. Even if the 'Qazi' rules to the 
contrary, he has to fast. 'Roza' becomes 
essential (Farz) for him. 
(B) However if the 'Ramadan' moon is 
reportedly sighted at a place more than 
sixteen miles away from where the man is 
situated the fasting will not be incumbent on 
him or on the other residents of that place. 

The second 'Farz' or duty is the intention (The 
'Niyyat') of fasting. In case the moon has not 
been sighted, it is not in order to form a 
conditional intent and go to sleep 'that if the 
Ramadan moon is sighted I will fast tomorrow'. 
A firm resolve is of the essence. However, if a 
person goes to sleep earnestly hoping to fast the 
next day and the moon is sighted in the 
meantime, then it is an other thing. The 
unavoidable state of indecision to this effect on 
the night of the conclusion of twenty nine 
'Rozas' and the consequent infirm resolve is 
however tangible because of his being unaware 
about the thirtieth fast. So much so, that if a 
person be confined in a dark place in such a 
situation and may not have access outside, he is 
allowed to form an intention (A 'Niyyat') and 
act according to it. In the same manner, if a 
lady has a strong intuition that her menstruation 
will stop 'tomorrow' and it does, then there is 
no infringement of her preceding intention 



270 



('Niyyat') to this effect. 

On general principle, nothing is allowed to be 
put in or instituted into the system. For example 
having an injection, blood transfusion and 
putting 'Surma* (Oriental rouge) in the eye is 
not allowed. 

However, there is no harm in, say, cleaning of 
the ears or superficial dressing of an affected 
part of the body etc. due to unavoidable 
reasons beyond one's control. Similarly if some 
extraneous flying article like an insect or dust 
vapour enters one's body involuntarily, the fast 
is not affected. 

Normal gargelling with water does no damage 
to the fast but if some one resorts to undue 
exaggeration is doing so and water enters the 
body then it will cause infringement of the 
'Roza'. While this can happen; on the contrary, 
if some body partakes of some little thing 
inadvertently even then his fast will remain 
unimpeached, as it is basically the spirit of the 
law and not the letter of the law that matters. 
Nevertheless if a person makes the blunder of 
the wrong estimation of the day or night, he will 
have to suffer for it. 

Marital conjugation with one's spouse is 
forbidden during the fast. The 'Roza' still 
remains valid, if one can't have a bath before 
keeping the fast but does so later due to non 
availibility of water or similar extenuating 
circumstances beyond one's control, after such 



271 



conjugation. 

(V) 'Roza' - fasting is not permissible if semen is 
discharged whether before or after such marital 
union or even irrespective of it. 

(VI) The sixth condition is that a person should not 
vomit wilfully. There is no harm in involuntary 
vomiting or in fibrotic spitting, specially in flu but 
if such a mass collects in the mouth and is 
inhaled again, the Roza will become 'BatiP (i.e. 
invalid) . 

THE SUNNATS OF 'ROZA' 

'Sunnat' means to follow in the foot steps of the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him). There are six 'Sunnats' of 'Roza'. 

1. To be quick in keeping the fast at , Sehri' (The 
time of keeping or beginning the fast). 
(According to Imam Abu Hanifa (Rahmatullah 
Alaih), acting to its contrary is better). 

2. To consummate the fast timely with water or 
preferably with a date. 

3. To avoid doing 'Miswak* (Brushing one's teeth 
with a green stick, as in olden times) in the 
afternoon. (However, according to Imam Abu 
Hanifa (Rahmatullah Alaih), it can be done at 
any time) . 

4. To entertain the poor (The Fuqara) to a meal. 

5. To sit for Ttikaf (Exclusive concentration in 
prayers and worship in a secluded place or in a 
mosque) in a mosque, particularly in the last ten 



272 



days of the 'Ramadan'. It is believed that the 
'Shabe Qadar' (The most blessed and 
consecrated night), the 'Night of the nights' is 
one of these ten nights. The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
used to wholly devote himself to worship and 
prayers during the last 'Ashra' (Ten days - 
including nights) of 'Ramadan'. The members of 
his family used to join him. It is said that this 
Holy night of 'Shabe Qadar' is one amongst 
'odd' nights of this 'Ashra'. Some people are of 
the opinion that it is the twenty seventh night. 

It is singularly fortunate to sit in 'Itikaf (In 
secluded meditation and prayers) in the last ten 
days of the month of 'Ramadan'. If some one 
resolyes to do so before the advent of 
'Ramadan' then its fulfillment is necessary for 
him. One should not go out of one's place of 
'Itikaf from the mosque except to discharge his 
unavoidable human requirements of personal 
nature. After completing his abolutions 
('Wuzzoo') in the mosque, the man should 
again come back to his secluded place specified 
for meditation and prayers. It is necessary to 
renew the intention (The 'Niyyat') of 'Itikaf as 
soon as he reaches his 'Jai Itikaf (The place of 
seclusion) after his abolutions etc. 

6. To recite the Holy Qur'an, excessively. 

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF HOZA* (FASTING) 

Status wise the 'Roza' is of three kinds viz:- 



273 



(i) The fast ('Roza') of the 'Awam' (The common 
people). 

(ii) The fast ('Roza') of the 'Khaws' (The special 
people) . 

(Hi) The fast ('Roza') of the 'Akhsul Khaws* (The 
must elite persons) 

The first category of the ('Roza') fasting as just 
described, is the lowest in status and broadly speaking 
involves abstinence from eating, drinking and going 
near their mates for marital conjugation. 

In antithesis the 'Roza' of the 'Akhsul Khawas' 
(The elite: The best of the best) is of the highest status. 
It entails that:- 

A. Such a person has to exclude all other 
considerations from his heart excluding those of 
the fear of Allah. 

B. He entrusts himself fully to Allah. Segregates 
and draws a clear line between the 'Zahir' and 
'Batin'. 

C. Of course, in drawing such a line in the worldly 
things and those pertaining to his soul, there is 
no harm if he absorbs himself in the affairs of 
this world which may be conducive to the 
hereafter. 

D. Although the endeavour to attain the worldly 
matters of importance, basic to his existence in 
the world are permissible, even their pursuit is 
forbidden to him. For instance for him to try to 



274 



arrange for his evening 'Iftari' (The act of 
breaking the fast by taking food) during day 
time will render his 4 Roza* - the fast 'Batil', 
invalid. It would amount to lack of his absolute 
trust in the word of the 'Khairur Raziqeen' 
(Allah, the Supreme provider of livelihood) who 
has promised to provide livelihood to all. This is 
the status, of the 'Roza' of the people of the elite 
status of the prophets and the 'Siddiqeen'. 

However the 'Roza' - the fasting of the 'Khawas' 
consists of following six attributes. 

(i). Besides abstaining from eating, drinking, 
physical conjugation with their spouses and 
refraining from unlofty conduct they should 
shie'd their eyes from being diverted towards 
any thing which may malign their hearts to be 
attracted by unGodly thoughts of carnal 
turpitude. For this very reason the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) has 
said that in the armoury of the Satan there is a 
deadly poison-arrow. Any one who is able to 
protect himself from it, will be blessed by Allah 
with the prize of 'Iman' (Staunch Faith) which 
will enrapture his heart. 

Hazrat Anas (Allah be pleased with him) has 
quoted that five things are harmful to Roza. 

1. Telling lies 

2. Back-biting 

3. Swearing untruthfully 

4. Mischief mongering 



275 

5. Sensual acts 

(ii) . Such a person of the 'Khawas' he should keep 
his tongue under check. He should guard 
against uncalled for and impious talk. His 
speech should be discreet and amiably to the 
point. His discourse should always be directed 
to the good of his listners. It is better for him to 
remain quiet rather than enter into any 
argument with anybody. Quarrelsome discourse 
sometimes culminate in the slandering of other 
people or in contradictions bordering on 
falsehood. Such behaviour terminates the fast. 

It is narrated that two* women were fasting. 
They were very thirsty. They could not endure 
it any more and their patience came to an end. 
They came to the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) and asked for 
permission to break their fasts. He sent a utensil 
to them with a message that they may be asked 
to vomit in it. When they did so, blood clots 
were extruded. This surprised everybody. The 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) clarified that they had kept their fast 
with 'HalalV (valid) things but had later 
besmirched their fast with 'Haram' (Not 
permissible) things by speaking ill about other 
people behind their backs i.e. these blood clots 
were actually the flesh of other people that they 
had thus eaten. 

(Hi) . The third thing is that not only there Is a ban on 
seeing unseemly and provocative things but also 



276 



there is a bar against hearing unholy and 
undesirable things. Undoubtedly what is bad to 
say is worse to hear. The person who permits 
himself to hear backbiting, slander and 
mischievous talk becomes a party to it and 
shares the sin. 

(iv) . The fourth condition is in confirmation of the 

fact that when a person is fasting, each limb of 
his body should be in the state of 'Roza' with 
him. Hence, he should ensure that each part of 
his person should remain safe guarded against 
all indiscretions. A person who is not careful to 
this effect can be compared to such a man who 
may abstain from taking fruit but not desist from 
taking poisonojus. .things. A meal is food but 
overeating is hazardous. The food itself is 
harmless but contamination is fatal. Vice is 
deadly poison. That is the reason that the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) once remarked that there are many 
'Rozadars' who do not get anything from the 
fast (the 'Roza') except hunger and thirst. 

(v) . The fifth important thing to remember is:- 

A. That he should take only Halal things at the 
time of 'Iftar'. (The time of consummating 
the fast). All doubtful things should be 
avoided. 

B. Over eating, gluttony and excessive intake 
of delicious things should be curbed. The 
very purpose of fasting is to eradicate 
succumbing to temptation. A well laid out 



277 

'Dastarkhawn* (Food table) with assorted 
variety of dishes and toothesome food is the 
last thing desired. Such delicacies enhance 
the desire. In point of fact the spirit of the 
'Roza' rests in going without food or in 
eating sparingly to exist. The saints purify 
their souls with such therapy. As a matter of 
fact according to 'Sunnat', the real charm of 
the 'Roza' can be relished by doing so and 
by sleeping less so that the consequent 
weakness, debility and the langour felt may 
elate the soul with the satisfaction of his 
sacrifice. If the man does not eat less and 
go to sleep early, how can he say his 
'Tahhajud' (Midnightly prayers: Vigil and 
worship) prayers? The Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) has 
said that an over filled stomach is* a 
determent to Godliness. 



Lastly, after he has consummated his fast he 
should not $vorry about, whether, his 'Roza' has 
been accepted" and blessed or not? It is stated 
that once «Hazrat Hassan Basari (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) happened to pass by a people in his 
travels who were busy in rejoicing unstintedly 
on the day of 'Eid'. He could not help 
remarking that Allah the Merciful has made the 
month of 'Ramadan' like an arena to perform 
dedicated worship and faithful service in it, but 
not to fritter away its scope by converting it into 
an idle playground to no purpose. He added 
that there is a set of people who have derived 
the maximum good by striving to excel each 



278 



other in the worthy cause of the exercise of 
fruitful service whereas the other lot of people 
have done nothing but waste their energies in 
aimless ramblings. If the veil was lifted, perhaps 
those who are sitting silent and sombre today 
may be the right people who should be rejoicing 
and those who have gone berserk in 
unbecoming euphoria may be the ones who 
would become silent and sorry about their 
inappropriate conduct. 

The moral of the story is that the 'Roza' of that 
man who just manages not to eat or drink in 
'Ramadan' is like a body without its soul. The true 
intrinsic truth of the 'Roza' is that man should become 
angel-like. The angels are pure and immune to all 
desires. Vice versa the animals are submerged in 
desires. Therefore they are far away from the 
'Malaika', the angels. Consequently, the man who is 
sunk in the vagaries of lust and avarice becomes like 
an animal. Conversely, when the desires are 
overcome, he becomes similar to angels. From this 
point of view man is in close proximity to the angels 
but not from the perspective of the station or situation 
of residence. And the angels are close to Allah. Hence 
that man will too become close to Allah. Hence that 
man will too become close to Allah who acquires their 
traits. 

Therefore it does not behave a good 'Rozadar' 
to make special arrangements of his 'Iftari' so that he 
may stuff himself to the brim with sumptuous food 
after a days hunger. It will dissipate the spirit, the 'soul' 
of his 'Roza'. 



279 



QAZA - KAFFARA - IMSAK AND FIDYA 

In case of breaking the fast before its time of 
consummation 'Qaza\ 'Kaffara' or 'Fidya' becomes 
compulsory, as per following conditions. 

(1) If a Muslim does not fast without any valid 
reason, in that case the 'Qaza' (Doing it later) of 
the 'Roza' is 'Wajib'. He has to complete the 
prescribed ('Rioza's') fasts. Similarly 'Qaza' of 
the Roza is (Wajib) also essential for the 
following persons. 

(i) A woman in the period of her menses. 

(ii) A 'Musaffer' i.e. one on a journey away 
from his home and hearth. 

(iii) An ailing person. 

(iv) A pregnant woman. 

(v) An apostate (one who leaves the Faith) . 

However the 'Qaza' of the 'Roza' is not 
applicable to a person who is mad i.e. not in his 
senses. Also 'Qaza' is not applicable to a 'Nabaligh' 
person (i.e. A minor: A person who is not adult) . 

'Kaffara' has to be paid when a person exudes 
or happens to discharge semen, during his fasting. The 
Kaffara (Fine: Payment in lieu) for it is as under 

(i) One 'Laundi' (Slave girl) or a 'Ghulam' should 
be set free (According to the 'Hanafi* school of 
thought 'Kaffara' has to be paid if a person want 
only eats or drinks in 'Ramadan') . 



280 



(«) 



If even this is not possible in that case such a 
person should give sixty 'Muds' of grain to sixty 
Miskeens i.e. sixty poor people. One 'Mud* is 
equal to one third less than one maund and 
one seer. 

'Imsak' means remaining without food, drink or 
physical matrimonial conjugation with one's spouse for 
the rest of the day. It is applicable to that person who 
may break his fast without any valid reason It is 
however not applicable to the following:- 

(0 If a woman stops her period during the day 
(H) If a sick person gets well during the day. 

Further more if a person comes to know late 
about the sighting of the moon. After having eaten 
whatever he has, he should thereafter continue without 
eating and drinking till the time of 'Iftari'. 

It is better for a 'MussanV to keep'fast but if he 
finds himself incapable to do so, in that case he should 
give 'Fidya' of one 'Mud' of grain to a poor man. 

, If a woman has a suckling child and has to 
break her fast for the sake of the life of the infant in 
that case she will have to give the 'Fidya' in lieu along 
with the 'Qaza' of the 'Roza'. 



If a person is so old and weak that he can not 
keep the 'Roza' (Fast), in that case he has to pay the 
Fidya instead. 



281 



If a person delays the 'Qaza' of a Roza so 
inordinately that the next Ramadan sets in, then he 
has to pay 'Fidya' also for every 'Qaza Roza'. 

To fast on the days that are sacred in the year is 
also blessed and 'Sunnat'. For instance. 

(i) 'Yomul Haj'. The day Haj is performed. 

(ii) The 'Yomul Ashoora'. The tenth day of 
'Muharram' (The first month of Islamic calendar. 
Commemorated for the Martyrdom of Hazrat 
Imam Hussain (Allah be pleased with him). 

(iii) The first nine days of the month of 'Zil Haj'. 

(iv) The first ten days of the month of 'Muharram'. 

(v) The sacred days of the months of 'Rajab' and 
'Shaaban'. 

It is in the 'Hadith' that barring the compulsory 
'Rozas' of the 'Ramadan' these optional Roza's are very 
important, So much so that except the fasting in the 
'Ramadan' one 'Roza' of these months. 

In the Islamic calendar, the months of 
'Muharram', 'Rajab', 'Zeeqad' and 'Zil Haj' are called 
the months of 'Hurmat' (Respect and significance) . The 
fourth i.e. the month of 'Zil Haj' is the most important 
of them all because 'Haj' is performed in it. 

It is also in the 'Hadith Sharif that so blessed 
are the 'Rozas' kept in the 'Ayyam-e-Haj' in the Day of 
the 'Haj' that every fast of these days is equivalent to 
fasting for a year and obedience and worship 
performed in these venerated nights is tantamount to 



282 



praying In the night of the 'Lailatul Qadar'. People 
asked the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) if the 'Sawaab', the reward of 'Jehad' is 
more than that? He replied in the negative. 

In order that importance and the special 
significance of fasting during the stipulated and sacred 
month of 'Ramadan' is not reduced in any way, as 
these 'Rozas' have been specifically ordained by God, 
some of the 'Sahaba-e-Karam' (Allah be pleased with 
them) advocated that people should not fast for the 
whole month of 'Shabaan'. They considered it 
advisable to, accordingly keep 'Rozas' in the first 
' fortnight of the month of 'Shabaan' only. Thus, they 
said, the 'Rozas' of Shabaan would not extend to the 
essential fasting in the Holy month of 'Ramadan'. The 
'Rozas' of 'Ramadan' are compulsory and proclaimed 
by Allah whereas the fasting in 'Shaaban' is optional, 
thought 'Mubarak' (Blessed). 

Also optional fasting in 'Ayyame-Abyad' (Full 
moon days like 14th, 15th and 16th lunar month). 

Nevertheless, there is a strict stricture against 
keeping Roza's on the following days. Fasting is 
forbidden on these days i.e. on: - 

(i) The 'Eidul Fitr* day. 

(ii) On the Day of the 'Eidul Azha'. 

(Hi) On the Eleventh, Twelfth and the Thirteenth of 
the month of 'Zil Haj'. These three days are 
_ called the 'Ayyamul Tashreeq'. (Days during 
which meat is preserved by drying). 



283 



It is narrated that Hazrat Abdullah Bin Umru 
Bin Aas once asked the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) about the 'Saume 
Dawood' (The Roza of Prophet Daood (peace of Allah 
be upon him): Prophet David). He praised it highly. It 
comprised fasting for the whole year on alternate days. 

The 'Ahle-Ilm', the learned have emphasised 
the worth and virtue of keeping on fasting from time to 
time, in addition to these important sanctified days, for 
Tazkia-e-Naf's (For cleansing the soul) with the 
exception of the above mentioned days when fasting 
(The 'Roza') is forbidden. 

HAJ: THE HOLY PILGRIMAGE 

'Haj' is one of the f\ve principal, basic elements 
of Islam. It is essential for every Muslim to perform 
'Haj' (Holy Pilgrimage to the 'Khana-e-Ka'aba', the 
House of Allah in Makkah-e-Mukarrama) at least once 
in his life time, if he can afford it. It is the burning 
desire of every Muslim to do so. The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) has said 
that:- 

A. 'If a person possesses the means to perform 
'Haj' and yet desists from doing so, it matters 
the least whether he dies* a 'Yahoodi or a 
Nasrani' (Two non-believing classes have been 
exemplified, here) . Consequently, a person who 
yearns to perform 'Haj' and does so with his 
heart and soul in it, intoxicated in the love of 
Allah, asking forgiveness of his sins all the while 



284 



in humble servility, his soul would be refined. 
He would become innocent and pure like a 
new-born baby.' 

That many sins of man are so grievous that 
unless he pays penance for it (It's 'Kaffara': 
Restitution) by standing before Allah the 
Merciful in abject obedience in 'Arafaat' (The 
Holy arena where the faithfuls gather on the 
Day of 'Haj') he can not be forgiven.* 

That the Day of 'Haj' is the Holiest of the Holy 
days in Islamic calendar. On this Day the Devil 
('Iblees') suffers the worst possible defeat at the 
hands of man and the Satan is most 
ignominiously humiliated and disgraced. 

Vfce versa, on this Day of days, Allah showers 
untold blessings, most benevoleritly on His 
faithful servants and forgives almost all or most 
of their major sins.' 

That if a person departs from home to perform 
'Haj' and dies on the way, he will get the 
reward ('Sawaab') of one 'Haj' and one •Urnra 
(Pilgrimage to and worship in the 'House of 
Allah' in Makkha, other than for 'Haj') every 
year, till the Day of Judgement.' 

That if a person dies while performing the 'Haj' 
or breathes his last in 'Madina-e-Munnawara* 
(The Holy city of the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) while on 
pilgrimage to the Holy land, he will be absolved 
'of all reckoning* on Jthe last Day of Judgement. 



285 



F. 'That a 'Haji' who returns home and leads a 
pious life will be sent to Paradise.' 

G. That for a person to stand blessed in the 
'Maidan-e-Arafaat' and yet have fears and 
misgivings about his redemption by Allah is 
tantamount to lack of faith in His Mercy.' 

Hazrat Ali Ibne Almaufiq (Rahmatullah Alaih) a 
renowned saint has related that once he went to 
perform 'Haj' and the following episode took place. 

It was the night of 'Arfa' (The 'Haj' Day in 
'Arafaat'). He saw two angels descend from heaven 
clad in green. One asked the other. "Do you know 
how many people have performed 'Haj' this year?" 
"No." He replied. The first one said. "Six lacs of 'Hajis' 
have performed 'Haj', this year." Again he asked the 
other angel. "Do you know the 'Haj' of how many of 
them has been accepted this year?" Again, the other 
angel replied, "I don't know." Thereupon the first 
angel said that the 'Haj' of only six persons has been 
accepted this year." 

. Hazrat Ali (Rahmatullah Alaih), who was 
watching and listening to this extraordinary dialogue 
got perplexed. An immortal fear took hold of him. He 
started worrying if his 'Haj' too, has not been accepted 
by Allah. He went to the 'Mash-arul Haram' and fell 
asleep in acute anguish. 

To his utter bewilderment he agian saw the 
same two angels, there. They were conversing with 
each other. One of them said to the other. "Do you 



286 



know what Allah the Merciful has ordained tonight?" 
The second angel replied in the negative. The first 
angel said. "In His Supreme Beneficience Allah has 
accepted the 'Haj' of all the six lac pligirms present, 
owing to these six people." Upon this, Hazrat Ali 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) wofce up with a pleasant surprise, 
was overjoyed at Allah's Kindness and fell on his 
knees, prostrate in gratitude to His Sublime Kindness. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has also stated that it is the word of 
Allah that every year at least six lacs of people from 
different parts of the world would perform 'Haj' at 
'Khana-e-Kaaba'. In case the pilgrims are less than 
that, angels would be assigned to make up the 
number. The 'Khana-e-Ka'aba' - 'Kaabatullah' as it is 
called, would be beautifully decorated, made radiant in 
an exquisite splendour par excellence. The 'Hajjaj' 
(Plural of 'Haji', the Haj pilgrim) would be 
circumambulating it fondling it's 'Ghilaf (The Outer 
cover) adoringly and reverently, till it would be entered 
into Paradfse status quo, along with the propitious 
pilgrims. 

THE 'HAJ AND ITS PRE REQUISITES 

An intending Haji can put on the -Ahram' (The 
special attire for 'Haj') from the day of 'Eidui Fitar' 
(The day of thanks giving and rejoicing after the holy 
month of 'Ramadan'). The 'Ahram' donned before that 
can only be of 'Umra' and not that of 'Haj'. Thus the 
period in between comprises the months of 'Shawal', 
'Zilqaad' and of the nine days of the duration of 'Haj'. 



287 



1. A sensible boy can perform 'Haj' subject to 
certain conditions. 

2. Even an accompained suckling baby can also be 
present subject to all its rites being provided by 
its 'Vakil' or trustee. 

The basic pre-requisites of 'Haj' are as under: - 

I To be a Muslim. 

II To be free. 

III To be adult. 

IV To be in one's senses. 

V To put on the 'Ahram' (specified dress for 'Haj' 
and 'Umra') 

However if a lad or a girl, not fully grown puts 
on the 'Ahram' and becomes adult i.e. comes of age 
before standing in prayer in the 'Arafat' (The large 
sacred ground for assembly of pilgrims where the 'Haj' 
rites are performed every year) or if any one of them 
sets a slave free (male or female), he or she would 
become eligible for 'Haj'. As for the Haj in lieu, it can 
only be performed by the 'Vakil' (The representative 
assigned to do so), if he has already performed his 
own 'Haj', first. Otherwise even if he tries to do so, the 
'Haj' performed by him on behalf his principal despite 
his (the vakil's) 'Niyyat' or intention to this effect, will 
be ascribed to him. 

The detailed pre-requisites of performing the 
'Haj' are as folio ws:- 

1. Islam 

2. Adulthood 



288 



3. Freedom 

4. 'Istita'at' i.e. the capability 

A. Capability and strength to perform the rituals of 
the 'Haj on his own. 

B. Capability to endure the rigours of the journey. 

C. Financial capability i.e. 

(i) The intending 'Haj' pilgrim should not be 
under burden of debt. 

(ii) He should afford expenses to this effect. 

(iii) He should be able to leave behind enough 
financial support, for his family and other 
dependents before proceeding to perform 
'Haj'. 

However, should a person not be capable to 
perform the 'Haj* on his own due to lack of vitality or 
strength or be paralysed or be an invalid person or be 
incapacitated due to continuous illness, be very weak 
and infirm owing to old age or consuming sickness but 
nevertheless have the monetary assistance to do so, he 
may defray the necessary expenses for this purpose 
and send a 'vakil' (A representative) to perform 'Haj' 
on his behalf. But, if his son offers to do so of his own 
free will, free of cost for his parent, his sincerity of 
purpose would not go unrewarded by Allah. 
Nevertheless, the 'Haj' is such a sacred mission that if 
the same son tells his father or any of his parents "you 
are unfit to perform the 'Haj'. I will give the 'Mai', the 
money, let someone else go and perform the 'Haj* on 
your behalf" it is better that the offer be declined due 
to the favour involved in it. In such an eventuality, if 
he can have the 'Haj' performed out of his own 



289 



resources the next year, it would be fortunate for him. 
But if he dies before It, it would indeed be a pity as he 
may be liable to have become a 'Gunahgar', (Sinner: 
Disobedient) in that case. In such an eventuality the 
only course left is that of having someone perform 
'Haj-e-Niabat' i.e. (Haj in lieu) for him, although he 
might not have had formed a 'Niyyat' or to help 
resolve this, to this effect during his life time. 

To perform 'Haj' is an essential, basic stipulated 
rite that has to be performed as prescribed by Allah. 
Hazrat Abu Bakar Siddiq (Allah be pleased with him) 
was so rigid in this regard that once he remarked that 
1 intend to levy the payment of 'Jizya' (Levy in Lieu) 
on those who can afford to go for 'Haj' pilgrimage but 
do not do so.' 

ARKAN-E-HAJ: THE 'HA«T RITUALS 

The non-fulfilment of the following rites will 
render a 'Haj' pilgrim to give a 'Bakra' (A goat) in lieu, 
in sacrifice. 

1. 'Ahram' (The prescribed attire for pilgrimage) . 

2. Tawaf (The circumambience of the 4 Kana-e- 
Kaaba'). 

3. 'Saee' (To take seven rounds between the 
sacred hillocks of the 'Safa' and 'Marwa') . 

4. 'Arafaat' (The holy place, large ground where 
the pilgrims get together to perform Haj arid 
listen to the 'Khutba-e-Haj' i.e. the Haj 
Address). 

5. To remove some or all hair of the head, 
according to legend of rites. 



290 



The 'Haj' pilgrim will also have to give a 'Bakra' 
in sacrifice, if he fails to omit any of the following 
special services. 

(i) To pass by a stipulated 'Meeqat' (The boundary 
point: Usually the place where putting on the 
'Ahram' is necessary before going further to 
perform the 'Haj' or 'Umra') i.e. without attiring 
the 'Ahram*. 

(ii) The rite of legendary stone throwing. 
(Hi) To stay in the 'Arafaaf till sunset. 

(iv) To stay the night in the 'Muzdallafa' (sacred 
place) in the rites of the 'Haj'. 

(v) Essential stay of the 'Haj' pilgrim in 'Mina' (a 
sacred place in the rites of 'Haj') . 

(vi) To perform Tawaf-e-Vida' (To perform, the last 
seven parting rounds in circumambulating 
around the 'Khana-e-Kaaba') . 

There are three ways to perform Haj, viz:- 

1. 'IFRAD' 

2. 'QIR'AN' 

3. TAMATTU' 

'IFRAD' is the best of all. In it, the man should 
perform 'Haj', by himself first. After completing the 
rites of 'Haj' he should come out of 'Haram Sharif 
(The Grand Mosque of 'Baitullah') , put on 'Ahram' for 
'Umra' afresh and then complete the rites of the 
'Umra'. It is better to put 6n. the 'Ihram' of 'Umra' at 
'Suarana (A sacred place) rather than at 'Taneem' (A 
seared place). It 4s still better to do so of 'Taneem' 
rather than at 'Hudaibia' (A sacred place) . It is 'Sunnat' 



291 



to do so frorh these three places. 

In 'Qir'an' the man should from ('Niyyat') the 
intention of performing the 'Haj' and 'Umra' together, 
and say: 

. i j*s- j i*w diJ ^\ 

"O Allah! I am present for Hajj and 
'Umrah." 

So that the 'Ahram' worn may serve the perpose of 
both. It is like having a bath in which the 'Wuzoo' 
(Abolutions for prayers and worship) is inclusive. Never 
the less, he will have to give the 'Qurbani' i.e. sacrifice 
of a 'Bakra', in lieu. However this stipulation does not 
apply to the residents of the 'Makkah-e-Mukarrama' for 
whom there is a relaxation. They have to wear the 
'Ahram' but not from a 'Meeqat' (A point or place 
where 'Ahram' is to be put on by non-residents of 
Makkah-e-Mukarrama) , as luckily they live in 'Makkha- 
e-Mukarrama' itself. 

However, the pilgrim who resorts to 'Qir'an' 
and performs the 'Tawaf (circumambience around the 
'Khana-e-Kaaba', seven "times in worship and rite) and 
'Saee' before his stay in 'Arafaat'. Then it would hold 
good for 'Haj' and 'Umra' both. Nevertheless he will 
have to 'return' the 'Tawaf i.e. perform the 'Tawaf-e- 
Khana-e-Kaa'ba', again as the stipulation is that the 
'Tawaf has to be performed after the stay at 'Arafaat'. 
The 'Tamattu' means that the Haj pilgrim should put 
on the 'Ahram' at the boundary limit of 'Meeqat', enter 
'Makkah-e-Mukarrama' and then put off the 'Ahram'. 
For doing so, he has also to give a 'Bakra' (A goat or 
a ram) in sacrifice, in lieu. He can then put the vital 



292 



'Ahram' on, at the time of 'Haj'. If he does not or can 
not give this 'Qurbani' (sacrifice) he has to keep fast for 
three days (At a stretch or on different days) before the 
'Eidul Azha' in the Holy land and keep the remaining 
seven ('Rozas') fasts when he reaches home. The 
person who opts for 'Qiran' and may not be able to 
give sacrifice of a goat in lieu has to keep ten 'Rozas', 
in lieu. similarly. 

The sacrifice of a goat in 'Tamatta' is obligatory 
('Lazim') as under: - 

(i) It is essential for a pilgrim who may have attired 
the 'Ihram' for Haj in the months of 'Shawal', 
'Zeeqaad' or in the 'Ashra' of 'Zil Haj'. 

(ii) . Or such a 'Qurbani' i.e. sacrifice is prescribed 

for a person who may have termed the 'Haj' as 
a burden. 

(Hi) Or it is applicable if such a pilgrim may not have 
put on his 'Ahram' from the proper place or 
point stipulated i.e. from a 'Meeqat'. 

The following six things are forbidden in 'Haj'. 

1. To put on normal dress. 'Ihram' should be 
worn. ('Ihram' consists of a white sheet around 
arms and one sheet around the waist. The 
woman should wear normal, plain fully-covering 
dress assigned to Muslim ladies. Her face should 
be uncovered but hair covered while the man's 
head should be bare. Outside the 'Masjidul 
Haram', the 'Khana-e-Kaaba's' Grand Mosque, 
normal foot wear like slippers would do). There 



293 



is no harm if a woman be in a 'Saiban or 
Mahmil, in a covered state. 

2. Perfume or scent of any kind can not be applied 
or else one 'Bakra', a goat will have to be given 
in sacrifice. 

3. The hair and nails can not be cut or removed. 
Otherwise a 'Bakra' will have to be given in 
sacrifice. 

4. If one enters into matrimonial conjugation with 
his or her spouse with 'Ahram' on, in that case 
one camel, or a cow or seven goats will have to 
be given in sacrifice and the 'Haj' will become 
'Fasid' (Invalid) and it's 'Qaza' (Re-performance) 
will become incumbent. But if a person 
trangresses in such a manner for the first time, 
without 'Ahram', then the 'Haj' will not become 
'Fasid' i.e. it will not become Invalid, but the 
person concerned will have to give sacrifice of a 
camel. 

5. The conjugal love making of the kind of kissing, 
embracing or fondling each other is disallowed. 
For such acts also one 'Bakra' has to be given in 
sacrifice. Wedlock is forbidden in 'Ahram'. 

6. Hunting, killing of animals for sport is 
prohibited. However, there is no ban on fishing. 

For this offence also a camel, or a cow or a 
goat has to be given in 'Qurbani' (sacrifice) . The 
sacrifice to be given will have to be 
commensurate with the game, the animal thus 
killed br hunted. 

VITAL ASPECTS OF HAJ 

After this, it would be better if the intending 



294 



'Haji' is apprised of the sequence of the rites of the 
performance of 'Haj'. In any case, it is of the essence 
that such a fortunate person considers himself uniquely 
blessed. He should be immensely grateful to Allah. It is 
a journey in this world for the Hereafter. The intending 
pilgrim should avail this singular opportunity to benefit 
the maximum from it and should perform the 
stipulated rites of the Haj profoundly and properly. His 
days and nights should be spent in 'Yad-e-Ilahi' (In the 
worship of Allah). Saying of 'NawafiP (Plural of 'NafaP: 
Additional prayers of significance) and 'Sunnats' 
besides other prayers should become the order of the 
day with him. His eyes, ears, hands and the entire 
body should become vibrant in the love of Allah, to 
the utter exclusion of all other considerations. 

(ZADE-RAHA, PATH) AND THE HOLY 
JOURNEY 

Before setting his foot outside his doorsteps the 
pilgrim should do the following:- 

1. He should say Tauba' (To repent and relent) 
i.e. he should ask forgiveness of his sins from 
Allah. 

2. He should make sure that he has paid off debts 
if any. Then he should write his will. 

3. He should set aside and lay down enough funds 
for his family, for their expenses during his 
absence abroad out of his 'Rizq-e-Halal' 
(an honest earned livelihood) . 

4. He should re-check and make sure that:- 

a) His baggage is light and yet complete in all 



295 



respects. 

b) That his travel paraphernalia of daily use is 
handy. 

c) That he does not forget to take some 
money for the 'Fuqara'. 

d) That he gives some 'Sadaqa' (charity). 

e) That his mount is healthy and reliable. 

f) That he should select good companions for 
his journey. 

g) That he should ask his friends and family 
members to pray for him. At the same 
time, he should utter these words to them. 

"I entrust thy faith unto Allah and also thy 
trust and the consequences of thy 
performance." 

In return, these people should say the following words 
to the outgoing 'Haji', in response:- 

"I put you in the guard of Allah and His 
Security and may Allah increase you in 
piety and remove your concern and 
forgive your sins and may excellance 
come to which ever side you turn your 
face." 

h) Before leaving' the house the intending 
pilgrim should say two 'Rakaats' (salutations 
in prayer) of 'Namaz'. In the first 'Rakaat' 
he should recite the 'Soora-e-Alkafiroon' 



296 

(chapter from the Holy Book) and in the 
second 'Rakaat' he should recite the 'Soora- 
e-Ikhlas'. After having completed this 
worship he should raise his hands and pray 
to Allah, as follows:- 

"O Allah! Thou art the Companion of the 
journey and Thou art the Vigilant (even in 
my absence from my family) of my 
Family, Children and Property. Guard us 
and mem from every calamity. O Allah! 
We ask Thee in mis journey of our virtue 
and piety and such performance with 
which Thou art pleased." 

When he reaches the exit door of his house, he should 
say the following prayer and come out of his 
premises: - 

j&3 3 • J>* J ^ 

"In the name of Allah. I trust upon Allah. 
There Is no power to do good nor power 
to shun evil except by the help of Allah. O 
Allah! In thy name I part and on Thee I 



297 



trust, and with Thee 1 hold fast and toward 
Thee I turn my face O Allah. Increase me 
in Piety. Forgive my sins Make me to face 
all good wherever I turn my face." 

Thereafter, at the time of riding his mount (or 
embarking on whatever is mode of his conveyance) he 
should say the following prayer :- 

Oil tt/C UJA & j & j fH 

"In the name of Allah and with Allah and 
Allah is Great. Holy be He, who has 
subjected mis to us, though we are not 
equal to it, and surely we are returning to 
our Lord." 

The pilgrim should keep on saying his prayers and 
reciting from the 'Holy Qur'an' during his journey and 
when he reaches a place of some height en route, he 
should say the following prayer: - 

* 

"O Allah! For Thee there is the superiority 
over all and every superiority and for Thee 
is all Praise in every state." 

Thereafter, if he feels any fear or foreboding, he 
should recite the 'Ayatul Kursf (Venerated verses from 
the *Soora-e-Baqara' in the Holy Qur'an), along with 
the following verses and 'Soora-e-Ikhlas', 'Soora-e- 
Falaq* and 'Soora-e-Nas' from the Holy Book. 



298 



Allah bears witness that there is no god 
but He, and so do the angels and the men 
of knowledge, and He stands on justice; 
there is no god but He, the Mighty, the 
Wise. (3 : 18) 

PUTTING ON THE 'AHRAM' AND ENTERING 
THE HOLY CITY OF 'MAKKAH-E-MUKARRAMA' 

When the pilgrim reaches the 'Meeqat' (The 
boundary limit point where 'Ihram' is to be worn by the 
pilgrims) he should attend to the following things:- 

(i) He should cut the nails of his hands and feet. 

(ii) He should remove the stitched clothes worn by 
him, have a bath, use a dash of perfume before 
putting on the 'Ahram' and the 'Ahram' should 
consisting of one unstitched white sheet of 
adequate size across his shoulders and one 
around his shoulders. (PI: note separate 
'Ahram' stipulated for ladies). After that he 
should form the 'Niyyaf or intent of 'Haj' by the 
side of the standing camel or mount (or 
whatever, conveyance he has ready for his 
transportation) and should say the following: - 




( 299 

"I am present O Allah! I am present. There 
is no partner with Thee. I am present. 
Verily, All praise and all favour belongs to 
thee and all sovereignty. There is no 
partner with Thee." 

Whenever he comes across a high rising place in 
transit, he should utter the same words loudly. And as 
soon he reaches near the 'Kaaba Sharif he should 
have a preparatory bath. It is a 'Sunnaf (In pursuance 
of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) on account of the following nine important 
reasons of pre-eminent nature :- 

1. 'Ahram' 

2. The entrance into the Holy city of 'Makkah'. 

3. 'Tawaf-e-Ziarat' (The first sight of 'Khana-e- 
Kaaba' and its first Tawaf ) .' 

4. The stay in 'Arafat' 

5. The Holy place of the 'Muzadalafa'. 

6. To throw stones, as one of the important rites 
of'Haj'. 

7. Tawaf-e-Vida'. The last parting 'Tawaf of 
'Khana-e-Kaaba'. 

After that i.e. after entering the Holy city of 
'Makkah-e-Mukarrama' as soon as he casts first glance 
on the /Baitullah Sharif from outside, he should 
immediately utter the following :- 



300 



"There is no god save Allah. And Allah is 
Great. O Allah! Thou art all Peace and 
from Thee is all Peace, and Thy House is 
the House of Peace. Thou art blessed 
Possessor of Might and Glory! O Allah! 
This is Thy House Thou hast made it great 
and Thou hast given it honour and 
respect. O Allah! Increase it in greatness, 
Increase its Honour and respect and 
increase its grandeur and whoso performs 
its Haj, increase his virtue and honour. O 
Allah! Open for me Thy doors of Mercy 
and admit me into Thy Paradise and grant 
me refuge from The outcast Satan. " 

Then after that he should enter the 'Haram Sharif', the 
House of Allah from the entrance door of 'Bani 
Shaiba', cast his eyes reverently on the 'Baitullah 
Sharif (The House of Allah) and intend to kiss the 
4 Hajr-e-Aswad' (The sacred stone encased and installed 
in the 4 Khana-e-Kaaba') . In case he can not do so 
owing to a large congregation of the pilgrims there, he 
should extend his hand towards it to this effect and say 
these words. After that he should start his Tawaf. 

- OlJlj^ «M*UJ j Iftjl ^iUI fjfr 

'O Allah! I put my trust into Thee and also 
my contract that I have made. Thou be 
my witness to its fulfillment." 



301 



THE 'TAWAF-E-KHANA-E-KAA'BA' 

The rites of Tawaf of 'Khana-e-Kaa'ba' are as 
under:- 

"O Allah! With due faith and testifying Thy 
Book, and in fufilment of Thy covenant 
and in obedience to the way of Thy 
Prophet Muhammad (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him and his 
Companions)." 

(i) The upper portion of the 'Ahram' sheet should 
be so looped that it should pass under the right 
armpit and so set it across the front part of the 
neck around the upper portion of the chest that 
its both ends should rest, down the left shoulder 
back. 

(ii) The Tawaf (circumambulation) should be 
started right from the 'Hajre-Aswad' with the 
following prayer: - 

(Hi) No sooner, the pilgrim reaches 'the door' of the 
'Khana-e-Kaa'ba', than he should say as under:- 

"O Allah! This House is Thy House and 
this Sanctuary is Thy Sanctuary and this 
security is Thy security and this House is a 
place of refuge from the fire." 

(iv) When he reaches the 'Rukne-Iraqi', he should 
say:- 



302 

"O Allah! I seek refuge to Thee from 
doubt, polytheism infidelity, hypocricy 
and enmity bad conduct, bad look, in 
family, property and children." 

When he reaches the 'Meezabe Rehmat' (The 
Arch of Blessings) he should utter the 
following;- 

du> > if* > a # -db> -jfc yte 

JJL j *&U\ j & J w fti ■ JU o^i ^ ^ 

"O Allah! Give me shade under Thy shade 
on the Day on which there will be no 
shade but the shade of Thy Throne. O 
Allah! Give me from the cup of 
Muhammad (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) such a drink that will not 
thereafter leave any thirst." 

Similarly, when he reaches the third 'Rukn' 
(The third blessed corner) i.e. the 'Rukne- 
Shami, he should recite the following prayer :- 

"O Allah! Make it an Accepted Hajj and 
an accepted effort of gratefulness, and a 
forgiven sin and a merchandise that is 



303 



never destroyed. O Almighty, O Forgiving, 
Forgive and show Mercy and Pardon what 
Thou knowest. Verily, Thou art Most 
Glorious, the Most Honourable." 

(vii) When he reaches the 'Rukne Yamani' he 
should recite the following prayer:- 

"O Allah! I seek refuge to Thee from 
infidelity, and I seek refuge to thee from 
Poverty, and from the Punishment of the 
grave, and from the calamities of life and 
death, and I seek refuge to Thee from the 
disgrace of this world and the Hereafter." 

(viii) Lastly, the pilgrim should say the following 
prayer between the 'Rukne Yamani and the 
'Hajre-Aswad': 

Li j EJ. S>iji J j XL± #|i J uf U, J#li 

"O Allah! O our Lord! Give us good in this 
world and good in the Hereafter, and save 
us by Thy Mercy from the Punishment of 
grave and the Punishment of the Fire." 

(ix) This completes one round called the 'Shaut' in 
Arabic. The pilgrim should complete seven 
rounds like this repeating these prayers. In case 
of large assembly and a huge throng around the 
'Khana-e-Kaa'ba', the pilgrim will have to 
perform the Tawaf at a distance from it. The 



304 



pilgrim should conduct the first three rounds at 
some pace while the last four rounds should be 
performed comparatively slowly. In every 
'Shaut' i.e. in every round he should intend to 
kiss the 'Hajre Aswad' when he reaches it but if 
he can't do he should extend his hand towards 
it, to this effect. In the same manner he should 
have the intention to reverently touch the 
'Rukne Yamani' but if he can not do so due to 
heavy rush of the faithful, he should extend his 
hand towards it, as if to do so. 
After the completion of the seven 'Shauts', the 
pilgrim should embrace the 'Khana-e-Kaa'ba' 
i.e. the 'Maqam-e-Multazim' (situated under the 
door of the 'Khana-e-Kaa'ba') touching his 
stomach, chest and the right cheek to it, 
fondling it adoringly with both hands, kissing it 
the while and pray, also saying the following. 
('Maqam-e-Mukazim' is that venerated place 
where prayers are mercifully, specially heard by 
Allah, as per belief of every Muslim). 

of W j A v 'Jfj aft <i itffi 

" * * 

"O Allah! O Lord of the Ancient House. 
Release my neck from the Fire. And save 
me from all evil and make me contented 
with that which Thou has provided me 
and give me blessing in that which thou 
hast granted me." 

At this time the pilgrim should recite "Darood 
Sharif" (Salutations and prayers for profound 
Blessings on the Holy Prophet (peace and 



305 



blessings of Allah be upon him) and 'Astaghfar' 
(Prayers for the forgiveness of one's sins) . After 
doing so the pilgrim should ask and beg of 
Allah of all that he wants in this world and in 
the hereafter. 

(xi) The 'Tawaf' is completed after saying "Dogana- 
e-Tawaf'i.e. two 'Rakaats' of 'Namaz' of thanks 
giving to Allah, at this place. It is better if the 
pilgrim recites 'Soora-e-Kafiiroon' after the 
• 'Soora-e-Fatiha' in the first 'Rakaaf of this 
'Namaz' and 'Soora-e-Ikhlas' in the second 
'Rakaat'. He should then pray to the Almighty 
for His Blessings and Favours. After completing 
the seven rounds with 'Dogana' his 'Tawaf is 
fulfilled. Then he should go and try to kiss the 
'Hajre Aswad'. After that he should proceed to 
absorb himself in 'Saee'. 

THE 'SAEE' 

The pilgrim should climb the hillock called 
'Safa', so that he may be able to see the 'Baitullah 
Sharif. He should then say the following prayer, facing 
the "Kaa'ba Sharif". 

^jji <J 'k\ ill '4I1 J i'j^j vl>3» f> j 

"There is no god save Allah, the Only, the 
One. There is no partner with Him. To 
Him belong all sovereignty and to Him 



306 



belong all Praise. He gives life and He 
gives death. He is Alive. He never dies. In 
His Hand is all excellence and He is Omni 
Potent There is no god save Him. He 
proved His Promise as True. He helped 
His Servant and granted honour to His 
Anpny and defeated the groups of 
enemies. He is One, There is no god save 
Allah being sincerely devoted to faith even 
if the disbelievers, abhor it." 

At the same time he can make any prayers that he 
wants. Thereafter he should proceed straight towards 
the visible hillock called the 'Marwa'. His passage 
should be rather slow till the 'green marked portion'. 
Uptill here he should recite the following Drayer:- 

ell dilj 'ft & j j^-jl j 'Jk\ l/j 

■ -a i m r> Jj m tf* j & 

. jUlivO» 

"O my Lord! Forgive and show Mercy and 
Pardon what Thou knowests, Verily, Thou 
art the Most Glorious and the Most 
Honourable. O Allah! Our Lord, Give us 
good in this world and give us good in the 
Hereafter and save us from the Fire." 

However, after that the pilgrim should cover the 
'green-mile' portion rather hurriedly. Thereafter he 
should again walk at normal pace towards the hillock 
'Marwa'. When he reaches it he should mount it, face 
the 'Khana-e-Kaaba' and say the same prayers. This 
means that one 'chakkar' (round of one 
circumambulation) has been completed. The pilgrim 



307 



should return from the hillock 'Marwa' to the hillock 
'Safa' in the same manner. It would mean the 
completion of the second 'chakkar', the second round. 

The pilgrim has to complete this process seven 
time is going from the 'Safa' to the 'Marwa' and back 
and complete seven 'chakkars' as such i.e. cover the 
distance as aforementioned, seven times between these 
two sacred hillocks of 'Safa' and 'Marwa'. 

THE STAY AT 'ARAFAT 

If the people of the caravan of the 'Haj' pilgrims 
re.ach the 'Arafat' on the Day of the 'Arafa', they 
should not engage themselves in the Tawafe- 
Qudoom'. They must however do so, if they reach 
there before that Day. 

The pilgrim should depart from 'Makkah-e- 
Mukarrama' on 'Tarviat' i.e. on the eighth of 'Zil Hajjat' 
for 'Mina' (A sacred place enroute), spend the night 
there and reach Arafat the next day. The time period 
of stay allowed there is from the hour of 'ZawaP to the 
'Eid' morning. The 'Haj' of that pilgrim will be 
forefeited who reaches there later than that. 

On the Day of the 'Arfa' the pilgrim should take 
a bath and say the 'Zuhr' and 'Asr' prayers together 
and get absorbed in saying prayers and worship 
devotedly. It is advisable that the pilgrim should not 
keep 'Roza' on the Day of 'Arfa' so that he may not 
get tired and weak. 

As a matter of fact the real purpose of 'Haj' is to 
be able to say prayers and worship Allah to the 
utmost. On this paramount day the prayers of the 
people are specially heard and granted by Allah 
Almighty. The prayers of the 'Haji' for his friends and 



308 



the family and their good wishes for him are received 
with high ^probation by Allah on the 'Haj* day. 
Nevertheless the 'Zikr* of 'La iiaha Illullah' is the prime 
rememberance and 'Zikr' of Allah on the Day of 'Haj'. 

Frqrri the time of 'Zawal' till the evening the 
pilgrim should not spare moment without begging 
pardon of Allah of all his sins. He should keep on 
praising Him (Saying His 'Hamd'} and should remain 
beseeching Him for His Kindness and Mercy for the 
rest of his life in this world and in the Hereafter. 

Many prayrs specially effective of this crucially 
propitious juncture have been compiled in the sister 
volume of this work named the 'Ihyaul UloonV. Other 
booklets of prayers are also available for the pilgrims. 
But the fact remains that it is the spirit of the man that 
counts. When the heart of the pilgrim is charged with 
Allah's adoration, the supplicant prayers start emerging 
from it in eminently God-gifted words and elegant 
thoughts of His admiration and worship, each syllable 
of it baseeching Him lor His Divine Mercy. 

These prayers are so important that if an other 
'Haji' be making them loudly, the listner should say 
'Aameen* (God Bless. So it may be) and should make 
sure that he should not depart from the 'Maidan-e- 
Arafat's precincts before sunset. 



309 

(i) After 'Arafat* fh<8 pilgrim should go to 
'Muzwallafa' and take a bath there, as it is 
situated within the parameter of the 'Haram 
Sharif. 

(ii) He should say his Maghrib (The evening) .. 
prayers late, joining them with 'Isha' (The night) 
prayers i.e. say both of these prayers together 
under one 'Azaan and Iqamat' (call for prayers 
and congregational prayers behind an 'Imam' 
i.e. a prayer-leader) . The nocturnal stay here is 
not only prescribed but of so singular a status 
that a night vigil in prayers and worship here is 
tantamount ot earning elite blessings of Allah. 
The defaulting pilgrim who fails to stay the night 
here has to give a 'Bakra' in sacrifice, in lieu. 

(iii) There, he should collect seventy pebbles (These 
are available in plenty there to throw in 'Mina'. 
After that he should depart for Mina (A sacred 
place in holy rites of 'Haj') in the late part of the 
night artd say his Tajr' prayers in the early 
morning. 

(iv) When he reaches 'Mastarul Harram' he should 
remain there praying excessively till the dawn. 
From there onwards he will soon find himself in 
a place called 'Mahsar' where he should try and 
reach quickly by covering the ground fast 
specially if he has an animal with him. This is a 
Sunnat. 

(v) He should proceed onwards saying Takbir-o- 
Talmih* (chanting the Greatness and Praise of 
Allah) till he reaches a place at ascending height 
called 'Jamrat' on the 'Eid* morning. He should 
cross it and reach the height of the place called 



310 



'Jamratul Uqba'. By the time the sun is in first 
ascendence (At 'Aik Naiza') he should face the 
'Qibla' {'Baitullah Sharif) and throw seven 
stones at this 'Jumra' (Place marked for this 
purpose) reciting "Allah-o-Akbar while throwing 
these stones at the target (He should not utter 
'Labbaik' at this time). Simultaneously each time 
he should say these words. 

"O Allah! Confirming Thy Book and 
following the way of the Prophet" 

Having done this he should stop saying Talbiyah 
(labbaik'j and Takbir' i.e. Praise be to Allah 
the Great. He should however utter these words 
of Talbeeh-o-Takbir' after each Tare Names* till 
the morning of the last day of these 'Ayyame 
Tashreeq' (Viz the II, III and IVth day after Eid), 
keep on praying and give secrifice (Qurbani) of 
an animal. 

(vi) After that he should have a haircut. 

(vii) After having completed these last elements of 
'Haj' rites i.e. after having thrown the stones 
and having cut his hair, he can remove his 
'Ahram' and wear the normal dress. It means 
that those things that had become unpermissive 
for him in 'Ahram' have now been allowed to 
him except of course, the marital conjugation 
with his spouse and hunting and shooting. 

(viii) After that he should proceed to 'Makkah-e- 



311 



Mukarrama' and perform Tawafe Rukn' In 
proper 'Ahram'. The rejoicing of the 'Hajis' at 
this stage knows no bounds. This 'Tawaf starts 
from the 4 Eid' night and continuous throughout 
the 'Eid* day till late hours. In fact the later the 
better. 

(ix) When this Tawaf' is also completed with full 
reverence like Tawafe Qudoom' then the Haj of 
the pilgrim is completed. He becomes one of 
the most fortunate and blessed. After that he 
can have matrimonial union and is also allowed 
to hunt. 

(x) It may be noted that in 'Ayyame Tashreeq' the 
throwing of stones and spending the night 
should be after 'ZawaF. After the above 
mentioned Tawaf and 'ZawaP. After the above 
mentioned Tawaf and . 'Saee', the pilgrim 
should come back to 'Mina' and stay the night 
there. It is 'Wajib'. The next day he should have 
a bath before throwing the stones at the first 
'Jumra' (situated towards the Arafat) before 
'Zawal-e-Aftab' (The hour of decline of the sun) . 

He should throw seven stones at it, stand facing 
the 'Qibla' and say recite the last verses of 
prayer from the 'Soora-e-Baqara'. 

(xi) After that he should likewise throw seven stones 
at the 'Jumra' situated in the middle. Then he 
should throw seven pebbles at the 'Jumratul 
Uqba'. 

. * (xii) The same night he should stay at 'Mina'. In the 
same way he should throw twenty one pebbles, 
in the same order on these 'Jumrat' (Plural of 
Jumra: A mound). 



312 



(xiii) He should then return to 'Makkah-e-Muzzama' 
before sunset or else the pilgrim will have to 
stay the night there and repeat the process of 
the stone throwing the next day also. 

UMRA 

For performing the Umra, the pilgrim should do 
the following:- » 

(i) He should take a bath. 

(ii) As already stated, the 'Meeqats' for this purpose 
are situal£<l ! al Maalrtma*, Tari'eenY and at 
'Hudaibia'. Hence the pilgrim should go to the 
'Masjid-e-'A'isha' and put on the Ahram and say 
two 'Rakaats' of *Narriaz' to this effect, forming a 
'Niyyat' or resolve to perform Umra'. 

(Hi) He should say 'Talbeeh', ('Labbaik' - oh Allah! I 
am at your service in your cause) on the way. 
When he reaches the 'Haram Sharif he should 
stop reciting the Talbeeh' and should perform 
the following rites, as aforementioned. 

A. Perform Tawaf-e-Khana-e-Kaaba*. 

B. Do 'Saee' (As aforementioned) 

C. Have his hair cut. 

'Umra' can be , performed throughout the year. 
The residents of 'Makkan-e-Mukarrama* are singularly 
blessed in so much that they can perform innumerable 
'Umras'. Or at least Tawaf-e-Khana-e-Ka'aba' should 
be done as often as possible. The very 'Ziarat' (The 
holy sighting) of , Kaabatullah' is an unparalleled 
blessing. There is great 'Sawab' in saying two 'Rakaats' 



313 



of 'Namaz' between any two pillars of 'Haram Sharif 
on entering it bare footed humbly and respectfully. It is 
a rare sight in itself. 

People should take a lot of 4 Abe Zam Zam' (The 
holy water). It is an elixir of health and happiness. The 
sick should pray for his recovery when he takes it and 
should recite the following:- 

i» > >^«rf& j f£ # # ;^ a* 

"O Allah! Make it a healing from every 
disease and grant us sincerity and 
certitude and forgive us in the world and 
in the Hereafter." 

TAWAF-E-WIPA: THE FINAL PARTING TAWAF 

This parting Tawaf is performed at the time of 
leaving the Holy City, the *Makkah-e-Mukarrama\ 
When the pilgrim is ready to depart with his bag and 
baggage he goes to the 'Khana-e-Kaaba' and performs 
the Tawaf e Wida' by taking seven rounds, around 
'Baitullah Sharif. This Tawaf is performed in normal 
course without taking a quick pace in the first three 
rounds. 

The rites of the Tawaf have already been 
described. After the Tawaf the pilgrim should say two 
'Rakaats* of 'Namaz* of thanks giving. He should then 
go to the 'Maqam-e-MuItazim' and say his final prayers 
with extreme zeal and fervour. After having done this 
the pilgrim should retrace his steps backwards to the 
exit door of the 'Haram Sharif, praying for a while 



314 



with his eyes transfixed on the Khana-e-Kaaba, 
'aspiring to come back here', as soon as possible. 

'ZIARAT-E-MADINA-E-MUNAWWARA' 

To visit 'Madina-e-Munawwara' is a dream 
which comes true for a Muslim. It is extremely 
auspicious and felicitous. The hearts of all faithfuls the 
world overthrow with the very percept of being in this 
Holy City of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him). All the more so, as he (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said that:- 

A. 'Whoever comes and performs 'Ziaraf of the 
Holy Shrine at 'Madina-e-Munnawara' would be 
treated as if he has had the blessing of my 
'Ziaraf (Holy sight)'. 

B. He who comes to my grave at 'Madina-e- 
Munnawara' for My 'Ziaraf will surely eam for 

* himself the reward of my 'Shafaat' (Blessed 
intervention on behalf of some one) on the Day 
of Judgement.' 

The journey to 'Madina-e-Mannawara' is always 
replete with heavenly bliss. It's ecstasy should abound 
with perpetual 'Darood-o-Salaam' on the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
Particularly, the following 'Darood Sharif should be 
recited excessively on the way. 

"O Allah! This is the sacred city of Thy 
Messenger So make it a protection for us 
from the evil of the reckoning." 



315 



Before entering the 'Madina-e-Munawwara' the 
pilgrim, the ardent devotee should make himself 
worthy of this honour. 

1) He should take a bath. 

2) He should use some light perfume. 

3) He should use white wear. 

4) On entering the bounds of this holy city he 
should recite 'Darood-orSalam' most 
respectfully. 

5) When he is enraptured by the first sight of the 
walls of 'the Holy metropolis', he should say the 
following: - 

J*!\> tfV r j** is*jr*j f^ 1 

"O Allah! Admit me to admission of truth 
and take me out to a place of truth and 
appoint for me a great helper from Thee." 

6) There onwards is reverie and delight all the 
way. Similarly, no sooner the much awaited 
moment arrives and the pilgrim sets his (right) 
foot in the 'Masjid-e-Nabvi' (The Holy Mosque 
of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) , the first thing he should do 
is to say two 'Rakaats* of prayer in joyous 
thanks giving to Allah (preferably) under the 

'Minber' (The elevated platform from where call 
for prayers is given from a mosque to the 
faithful) so situated, that its ascent may be 
parallel to his right shoulder {The Holy k Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
used to be there)}. 

7) Then comes the most sublime moment. The 



3i6 



cherished hour of casting one's first glance at 
the 'Mashhade Aqdas' {The venerated jesting 
place of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him)} for the 'Ziarat' of 'Rozar 
e-Athar' {The Grandlolse Tomb of the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him}}* For that, one has to stand with his back 
to the 'Qibla'. (The real adoration lies in 
remaining at a respectful distance from it rather 
man in touching or kissing it). 

This 'Ziarat-e-Azom' (Trie grand homage) is the 
essence of a Muslims life, the culmination point of 
Allah's Mercy on him in granting him the high reward 
of paying his profound respects and reverence to the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) persona grata, as such. Then* he should state 
humbly, as follows: - 

"Salutation on thee Messenger of Allah, 
Salutation on thee, O Prophet of Allah, 
Salutation on thee O Favourite of Allah 
Salutation on thee O Allah's Chosen. 
Salutation on thee, O Leader of the 
Progeny of Adam. Salutation on thee O 



317 



Leader of the Messengers and the Last of 
all the Prophets and the Messenger of the 
Lord of the worlds. Peace be on thee and 
on thy Family and on thy Companions, 
the most purified, and on thy wives, the 
must purified and the mothers of the 
be|ievers. May AHah bless thee with the 
reward from our behalf better than the 
reward with which any prophet was 
blessed on behalf of his Ummah, and the 
Blessings be on thee equal to all who 
remember thee of the persons who remain 
busy in remembrance ' and equal to all 
who remain inattentive/unengeged in 
remembrance." 

In case he may be the carrier of a request to 
convey his 'Darood-o-Salam' on Him (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) he should do so as 
under :- 



"Salutation/Peace be on thee O 
Messenger of Allah from so and so and 
salutation/peace be on thee O Messenger 
of Allah from so and so." 

After having conveyed his 'Darood-o-Salam on 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him), he should proceed avft ^rther ■■ztn0 
convey his salutations to Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq agg. 
Hazrat Umre Farooq (Allah be pleased with them), as 
follows:- 



318 



U 'jli- -Oil U^l j*i teUH OlLJc « jUT dUl'i ^ OUjsJ 

"Salutation/Peace be on both of you O 
two ministers of the Messenger of Allah 
and his two assistants in the matter of 
establishment of the Religion till he 
remained alive and after his departure 
among his Ummah in the matter of 
religious affairs following his footsteps in 
this behalf and acting upon his Sunnah. 
So may all reward both of them better 
than the reward He gave to the ministers 
of any Prophet in the matter of his 
Religion." » 

After that he should go to 'JannatulBaqi' (The 
Rose garden of Baqi': Graveyard of the venerated 
sahabah and other elite) and perform Ziarat of the 
exalted 'Sahabah' and other respected persons buried 
there. 

The pilgrim should also avail the opportunity of 
seeing other 'Maqamate Muqaddasa' (Holy places) 
before departing from 'Madina-e-Munawwara'. 

Last of all, the pilgrim should go to the *Roza-e- 
Aqdas', say a lot of *Darood-o-Salaam' on the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
and return in reverent parting, praying for being 
blessed to be there once again, soon. 



319 

THE MYSTIQUE OF 'HA J' 

There is a specific mystique and moral in each 
one of the rites and stipulation of 'Haj' as hitherto 
described. This huge foregathering of the faithful from 
all parts of the world to a central place viz the 
'Kaabatullah', the House of Allah is not a mere 'ritual' 
for the people of this world to perform certain acts with 
outward religious bearing in it and be contented with it, 
resting on their laurels. In fact this entire excercise of a 
unique natu're is to make the man akin to Allah's 
'Ma'rafat' and prepare him for the 'Akhirat', the 
Hereafter. 

The man is diversive by nature. He is apt to be 
tempted. The worldly desire tends to make him 
unenthusiastic. Consequently he becomes prone to 
lose all normal values and succumbs to the charisma of 
the flirtations and blandishments of momentary 
pleasure, attainment and avarice to the extent that the 
tenets of civilised behaviour and the code of conduct 
prescribed by the 'Shariat' becomes meaningless to 
him, whereas, in fact the veracity of man's very 
existence and his eminence lies in abject obedience to 
Allah, by modelling his life in accordance with His 
dictates by doing good and refraining from evil. 

The isolated priesthood and the abondoning of 
the world and travelling to secluded spots in sparsely 
populated or uninhabitated places like the mountains 
or similar other refuges by the followers of the former 
prophets was in the same spirit of undisturbed 
meditation and being unmarried exclusively for worship 
of Allah. 



320 



(0 To adore Allah. 

(ii) To be totally submerged in His love and 
worship. 

(Hi) To follow His commands. * 
(iv) To live a pre-eminent life according to His 
dictates for the betterment of this world and to 
attain the best in the next. This is the essence of 
* man's purpose of life. 

Later, the people asked the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon -him) is such 
travels abroad and isolationism existed in Islam? He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) replied, 
"No, Allah has ordained the 'Haj' and 'Jehad' for us, 
instead." Thus its spirit was laid bare. Viz 

(i) 'Haj' provides spiritual elegance and solace. 

(ii) It also implies the reality of the righteousness 
and rigours in worship and faithful service, 

(iii) It enriches the soul metamorphically (superbly 
by natural steady process) . 

a) The 'Kaabatullah', the House of Allah - the 
most sacred place of all, has been granted a 
unique stature in the reverence of Allah 

• where the despotic king and the pamper all 
fully inclined to pay their dutiful homage as 
faithful servants at the Palace of the 
Supreme Emperor of them all. He has also 
raised the glory of the < Khana-e-Kaaba' aloft 
by banning (Making 'Harare') the frivolous 
sport of tainting and shooting in its sacred 
premises. 

b) To crown its grandeur, He has also made 



321 



its foreground (The 'Maidan-e-Arafat') 
replendently auspicious, to enable the 
ardent adorers of Allah to easily foregather 
there from all sides, despite the fact that He 
is above and beyond all considerations of 
being confined to residence in limitations of 
space of any kind, including this 
memento us mansion ascribed to Him, as 
'the House of Allah*. But lovers are such 
zealous and fervent beings that in their 
ardent admiration they tend to dote on 
everything pertaining to their beloved from 
the very core of their heart, 
c) This burning desire in the hearts of these 
indefatigable lovers and worshippers, has 
'made innumerable Muslims to travel from 
far distant lands the world . over; 
undertaking ardous journeys to reach the 
'Heaven of their aspirations and desire' 
against all odds, through thick and thin 
amongst vast jungles and waste lands. 

They were charged people. No hazard or 
hardship deterred them. They went on and on, till 
they reached their ('Manzil'), the goal, tired but 
triumphant, treading ceaselessly, through centuries. 
This process is still on, unabatedly and will remain so 
till the Day of Judgement. 

While all this can be understood by man, as 
there is a clear message in them, there are certain 
things like throwing stones and running on the 'Safa-o- 
Merwa' in the rites of 'Haj', which are beyond human 
comprehension. Obviously one gets to grips with those 
acts which have an immediate impact on one's 'Nafs'. 



322 



The inner self divines the virtue of such things and 
-makes the man understand and appreciate them. The 
underlying cause and its effect are interrelated. 

(i) For instance, the man knows intuitionally that 
by giving 'Zakat', timely aid and succour reaches 
the needy, which is a good act. 

(ii) The humility and subservience before Allah is 
liked by Allah, specially in prayers. It is 
rewarding. 

(iii) By keeping 'Roza' (fasting) man defeats the 
('Lashkar') the forces of evil of the Satan. It is a 
commendable deed. 

But the true greatness lies in obeying the orders 
of Allah blindly, irrespective of all considerations, just 
because He has ordained them. This is real obedience 
and veritable worship. That is- why the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) has said:- 

- iluw <*#J tiJLJ 

"To Proclaim "I am present" is a duty of a 
servant who performs Haj." 

This statement about 'Haj' elucidates the status of 'Haj' 
and that of the obedience of the humble servant of the 
Almighty, to Him. 

« 

It is the bounden duty of the servant to obey 
the orders -given by the master not to question them. 
Hence, when the order, the Command be from Allah, 
the obedience has got to be immediate, implicit and in 
toto. It is only the beginners negligent, indifferent and 



323 



nonjurning who are unfortunate to question such 
manifest command. When it comes to the blessed, all 
else vanishes. Allah and His will become the last word. 

THE MORAL ASPECT OF HAJ 

This 'Safar' i.e. journey (or voyage) for 
performing 'Haj' is unique. No one prepares for a 
journey, the way he does for 'Haj'. For,, in fact, Allah 
has made this particular journey for man, like his 
journey to the 'Akhirat'. 

(i) That is why, when a pilgrim leaves his family 
and friends, he leaves them in the care of Allah, 
thinking on his feet 'while bidding them farewell 
that he has been called by Allah. He may not 
come back to them again. He may not see 
them again. Therefore he says good bye to 
them. 

(ii) Also, such a passenger has little or no interest in 
this world and its manifestations. He knows that 
the meagre means of travel that he is carrying 
with him, is nothing. His actual baggage that 
counts in his 'Samaane Aakhirat' i.e. the 
worldly deeds he has performed. He has 
remorse for his unworthy acts at the same time 
he is not so sure of his good performance which 
may stand him in good stead. Allah is Great. 
He is very Merciful. Therefore he undertakes 
this pilgrimage in the hope that Allah may 
forgive him on account of the sad repentance of 
his sins. 

(iii) The discerning do it. Likewise a 'Haj' pilgrim 
should think of 'Maidane Hashr' when he covers 



324 



the vast lands in his journey. 

(iv) Similarly, the intending Haji's mount should 
remind him of his being finally mounted to be 
carried lifelessly to his place of burial. 

(v) And what brings the symbolic awakening of his 
'Safare Akhirat' the most in the pilgrim is his 
'Ahram'. What is Ahram? Every 'Haji' asks 
himself the same question and answers himself 
that it^ nothing else but the simple wear of the 
deceased, the 'Kaffan'. 

(vi) Also, while travelling across the jungles, sandy 
deserts, revines, hills and mountains he should 
not forget the hard passage ahead for a sinner 
from his grave to the 'Maidane Hashr' (The vast 
ground where every one will be assembled on 
the Day of Judgement) with many snakes and 
scorpions in it, all the way. 

That is why the pilgrim should be saying 
Talbiyah' in this journey uttering 'Labbaik' (Oh 
Allah! I, your humble servant am at your 
service, at your beck and call). This, he should 
remember would be the state of. affairs on the 
Day of Judgement. He should be prepared for 
it. 

It is related that Hazrat Ali Bin Al-Hussain's 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) face used to become pale 
and haggard while putting on the 'Ahram'. He 
used to shiver all over and dread saying the 
Talbiyah'. People used to ask him why was it 

so? He used to answer "It is so because, I am 
afraid that when I say the Talbeeh', I may God 
forbid be told that your entry is not accepted." 



325 



He used to say that in such case "I shall faint 
and die on the spot." 

Similarly a 'Hikayat' (An anecdote" A story) has 
been related by Hazrat Ibnul Hawaii 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) that once his 'Murshad' 
(Spiritual Leader, master) Hazrat Abu Sulaiman 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) did not utter the Talbeeh' 
on his journey and fainted on the way after a 
mile. When he came to senses, he said that 
Allah has apprised the Prophet Musa (Moses) 
(peace of Allah be upon him) through a 'Wahi' 
(Spiritual ordination or instruction) "to inform 
the tyrants of his Ummat' (Followers) not to 
name Him, not to call Him, because whoever 
remembers Him, He also remembers him in 
turn and that when a savage tyrant addresses 
Him, He sends His curse and condemnation on 
him," Hazrat Abu Sulaiman (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
also added that 'I have heard that when a 
person spends out of ill-earned money for 'Haj' 
and says 'Labbaik', he is replied as under:- 

■ - di ^ J u j j j9- u j dQ u 

"There is no (intrinsic value of your 
proclaiming) Labbaik was Sa'daik unless 
you throw away (the unlawful) you 
possess." 

As regards the Tawaf and 'Saee' their status is 
as follows: - 

Symbolically, it may be said that it is like the 
poor, the deprived and the down trodden 
walking around the grand palace or treading 



326 



about its corridors and antechambers, hoping 
and praying that some vista or source may be 
found for royal favour or per chance the 
majestic emperor may happen to cast a glance 
them, see their plight and come to their rescue. 
Forlorn and forsaken is the word for them, 
begging for succour and aid! The 'Safa and 
Marwa' passage ways can be compared to the 
corridors of the royal palace. 

As regards standing in the 'Arafat', the assembly 
of assorted multi-lingua people from different 
corners of the world, their prayers and parlance 
is different dialects are not unlike the Day of 
Judgement. There too the situation would be 
similar. Untold multitude would be gathered 
there in an agonising state of hope and fear, 
each worried about his own self. 

As for the stones, the legend has it that 'Hazrat 
Ibrahim Khaleelullah' (Prophet Abraham) (peace of 
Allah be upon him) threw the stones at the 'Iblees' 
(The Satan: The chief of the fallen angels) where he 
saw him. So, let the person who looks askance at it, 
follow suit to find out that it really hurts him at that 
place. Such a person had better to remain vigorous in 
his faith, cast off all wicked misgivings and entrust 
himself to Allah for his own betterment. Rather than 
he is overtaken by the Devil he should overpower him. 

We conclude the chapter here. Indeed there are 
many morals to be learnt, many lessons to be gained 
from 'Haj\ The more dedicated a person is, the more 
enlightened he will become. Also, more the 



327 



enlightenment, the more will be the blessings of Allah. 
Indeed the verity of happiness of the soul lies in being 
blessed and rewarded by Him i.e. in the happiness of 
Allah with man. 

RECITATION OF THE HOLY QUR'AN 

In paying faithful service to Allah, the recitation 
from His Holy Book has been considered to be the 
best form of worship to Him. Particularly recitation 
from the 'Holy Qur'an' in 'Qiam' (standing before 
Allah, in prayer) is considered to be the best. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has said that:- 

A. "The recitation of the 'Qur'an-e-Karim' by My 
Ummah (The Ummah (The followers) is best 
worship." 

B. "A person who has been blessed by Allah be 
the worth and virtue of the' Holy Book (Knows 
it by heart and acts upon it) would be failing in 
his priorities if he considers any reward superior 
to it." 

C. "If it is encased in leather it will never be 
singed." 

D. "Nothing else will be able to intercede better for 
a man on the Day of Judgement than the 'Holy 
Qur'an'. It is the Book of Allah. It is most 
blessed." 

E. "If a person is so engrossed in reciting the Holy 
Book that in its reverie he forgets to pray for 
himself or has no time to do so later, his 
unsolicited prayers would be granted by Allah in 



328 



the same manner as the wishes of a sincerely 
grateful person are kindly fulfilled by Him." 

F. "Recitation from the Holy Book is the best 
antidote for cleansing the tarnished heart of a 
man, of his sins." 

G. "I am leaving behind two teachers of great 
wisdom for you. One of them would be 
articulate white the other would be silent and 
sombre viz the 'Holy Qur'an' and the Death." 

Hazrat Abdullah Bin Masood (Allah be pleased 
with him) has always preached. "Recite the Holy 
Qur'an abundantly. It is a many splendoured thing to 
do so. So much so that for every word of it Allah the 
Merciful bestows the reward of ten 'Naikies' (Good 
deeds) on its devoted declaimant." He clarified further 
and said "Rather, even for each syllable of it having a 
distinct meaning, like 'Alif, 'Lam', 'Meem' (Arabic 
alphabets)." 

Hazrat Imam 'Ahmad Bin Hunbal (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) once said that Allah has kindly indicated to 
me that to recite from the Holy Book with a kindled 
heart is one of the best ways to please Him and attain 
nearness to Him." He added that on my enquiry to 
the effect "as to how much the understanding of its 
meaning mattered. I was told that whether the person 
reciting His Holy Book understands its meaning or not, 
he would be blessed similarly regardless, according to 
the spirit imbued in him, while doing so." 

THE 'TILAWAT: RECITATION OF THE HOLY 
'QUR'AN' BY THE NEGLIGENT 

It is therefore incumbent upon the person 



329 



reciting from the Holy Book to take care. 

(i) That he is very reverent. Exclusively attentive to 
it and refrains from commonplace, frivolous 
behaviour lest, God forbid he should 
inadvertently antagonise its blessings by his 
levity of conduct. 

(ii) So much so that the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said that 
"quite of a few 'munafiq's (The cursed 
hypocrites and imposters) of My 'Umma' 
(Followers) would also be 'Qur'an Khwan' 
(Reciters of the Holy Book)." Hence, it is not so 
much the act itself but the acquiesence in the 
act that matters. 

(iii) It is the oft-repeated saying of Hazrat Abu 
Sulaiman Durrani (Rahmatullah Alaih) that "the 
Angel incharge of Hell will nab the 'Muffassire 
Qur'an* (The Explainer; Interpretor and 
expounder of the verses of the Holy Book) 
sooner than the others." 

(iv) It is stipulated in the Torait' (The Torah: The 
Holy Book ordained on prophet 'Musa': Moses 
(peace of Allah be upon him) 'Oh My servant, 
a'ernt you ashamed of yourself that as soon as 
you receive a letter from your brother you make 
haste to read every word of it carefully 
instantaneously and ponder over it; whereas I 
have sent you a sacred missive so that you may 
peruse it, likewise ponder over its contents and 
act on it, but you do. not do so. And per 
chance if you read it, you do not give it a 



. 330 

second thought?" 
(v) According to Khawaja Hassan Basarf 
(RahmatuUah Alalh) "the general bent of mind 
of the olden days was much different and 
better. They revered the Holy Book and treated 
it as a testament of Blessings conferred on man 
a sacred missive sent by Allah to his servants 
containing His Message of Mercy. They used to 
solemnly meditate ©n it at night, note its salient 
features and model their lives in conformity with 
it during the day. Reverse is the case today. 
Now, the people are more engrossed in only 
laying stress on its 'Zer-o-Zabar' (The upper and 
lower punctuating hyphens). They are, thus 
more concerned with the letter of the law than 
the spirit of the law." • 

In short a person who recites the Holy Qur'an 
understands its meanings but does not pay any heed to 
it is worse off than a simple, soulfully inspired person 
who reads the Holy Book reverently as the 'Book of 
Allah' but does not understand it. 

To read it is to remember it. Therefore, the 
example of a person who recites the Holy Qur'an 
understands it and does not act upon it is like that of a 
servant who receives a letter from his master giving 
him certain directions, reads it pleasantly to it but does 
not obey any of the instructions conveyed to him He 
should know that he deserves to be taken to task for it. 

QURW C0RUM ° F RECITING T HE 'HOLY 



Holy 'Qur'an' is the Book of Allah, It is the 



most sacred testament. It is the last one ordained by 
Him. Hence, it behoves its reader to keep this in mind 
all the time. 

Of the many considerations to this effect, the 
following six factors of the decorum of reciting the 
Holy Qur'an are vitally important. 

I. It is elementary that the person who intends to 
recite the Holy Book should be. 

A. 'Ba Wuzoo' (To have performed his 
abolutions) . 

B. 'Qibla Rukh', (Facing the 'Qibla') humbly. 

Hazrat Ali Karamul Wajahah (Allah be pleased 
with him) has said that:- 

(i) A person who recites from the Holy Book while 
sitting during stipulated prayers, gets the reward 
equivalent to fifty good deeds done, for every 
word of it. 

(ii) While a person does so standing in the 
prescribed prayers is rewarded by Allah 
equivalent to a hundred good deeds done for 
every word of it. 

(iii) Likewise, the person who recites from the Holy 
Qur'an normally, 'Ba Wuzzoo' but not as part of 
the stipulated prayers is granted its ('Ajr') reward 
equivalent to twenty five good deeds 
performed, for every word of it. 

(iv) Lastly, a person (otherwise neat and clean but 



332 



not with 'Wuzzoo') who quotes from the Holy 
Book gets rewarded to the extent of ten good 
deeds done for every word quoted. 
Nevertheless reciting the Holy Qur'an, 
unabstracted in the solitude of the night has its 
oWn charm and gives the heart great solace 
which is a redeeming bonus in itself. 

Secondly, the Holy Book should be recited 
slowly and steadily with adequate pauses in 
between, prepondering and assimilating the 
meaning and depth of the Holy verses with 
reference to their context. To try and finish it 
hurriedly is against the spirit of its solemnity and 
virtually tantamounts to a grain-grind. There are 
some who finish it daily yet there is no saving 
grace in it. So much so that the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) has 
said that "a person who tries to finish the Holy 
'Qur'an' is less than three days automatically 
skips hurriedly over many a passage of 
invaluable significance and importance thus 
forfeiting the enlightment on some vital points of 
'Fiqah' also." (Fiqah: code of Islamic 
jurisprudence) . 

Hazrat Ibne Abbas (Rahmatullah Alaih) has also 
said for the same reason that for instance "the 
'Soorahs' (chapters) like 'Zilzal' and 'Qariaa' 
should be read slowly and with great care." 

It is related that once Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa 
(Allah be pleased with her) saw someone 
reciting the Holy Book rapidly. She remarked 



333 



that "He is neither reading the Holy Book nor 
he is quiet." That, just about seems it up. In 
view of its sanctity, it also devolves upon an 
'Ajami' (A non-Arab) who does not understand 
its meanings to recite the Holy 'Qur'an' slowly 
and courteously in tender grace. 

The cognoscenti, the saints, the saint like pious 
people get genuinely overawed by the majesty 
of ('Kalam-e-Ilahi') the Holy 'Qur'an'. When 
they read between the lines they become 
wonder-struck. A strange elation of feeling and 
thought overtakes them enriching their souls 
beyond comprehension. Likewise the other 
simple, sincere and God fearing persons get 
singularly touched when they recite from the 
Holy Book and at times cry their hearts out. 
They can not help but do so, sometimes over 
Allah's Benign mercy on 'Momins' (People 
having staunch iman' i.e. Faith in Allah) and 
the truly repentant and sometimes over His 
befitting wrath over the unremitting tyrants and 
the transgressors who had thought that they 
would be able to get away with it and would 
remain unscathed for ever. 

Therefore it behaves the person who recites out 
of the Holy Book to attain himself to the spirit 
of this illustrious Book and cry, while doing so. 
Even Hazrat Ibne Abbas (Allah be pleased with 
him) has stated that "for instance when the 
'Ayate Sajda' (The holy verse in Qur'an when 
one has to prostrate i.e. 'Sajda' on reciting it) of 
'Soorae Bani Israil' arrives do not hurry 



onwards, perform the 'Sajda' before the Allah 
Almighty most profoundly, be submerged heart 
and soul in it and do not raise your head up 
from the ground tin you cry. If the tears do not 
start pouring down from your eyes, your heart 
should be so touched with it that it should be 
crying, instead. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said that 
the Holy Qur'an has been ordained by Allah to 
make the man sober and sauve. A person who 
becomes morose and solicitous after reading it 
and it shows in his demeanour is amongst the 
blessed who have rightly come to realise how 
weak, ineffective and helpless the man is 
without the Grace of Allah. Such a person 
prospers while the negligent suffers. 
Fourthly, the person who reads the Holy 
Qur'an' should live up to the spirit of each 
verse of it i.e. • 

A. When he comes to the 'Ayate AfcbV (Holy 
verse of punishment for evil deeds), he 
should simultaneously seek mercy 'and 
forgiveness of Allah. 

B. Similarly, when he arrives at an 'Ayate 
Rehmat' (The holy verse of blessing) he 
should beseech Allah for His blessings. 

C. Likewise, when he reaches a holy verse in 
Praise of Allah and about His power and 
command, his heart should be saying a 
rosary of His Greatness. 

D. Of course, before starting the recitation of 
the Holy Qur'an, the man should initiate by 
seeking Allah's Protection from the Satan 



335 



and do so His Names, Allah the Most 
Beneficient and the Most Merciful. And 
when he concludes his recitation, he should 
utter the following, in gratitude. 



"O Allah! Shower Thy Mercy on me on 
account of the Qur'an and Make it for me 
a Leader, a Light, a guidance and a 
mercy. O Allah! Make me to remember 
that of it which I have forgotten and make 
me aware of that of it which I have been 
unaware and grant me its recitation in the 
hours of night and the sides of the day 
and make it a proof for me. Lord of all 
the worlds." 

E. In the same manner when he reaches the 
'Ayate Sajda' in the Holy Book, he should 
respectfully bow his head down touching 
the ground in 'Sajda' and say 'Allah-o- 
Akbar, (Allah is Great). The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
used to so. 

To forestall the fear of egotism, conceitedness 
or self display before others while reciting the 
Holy 'Qur'an, following steps should be taken. 

A. The man should try to be inconspicuously 
seated. 




336 



B. He should recite the Qur'an quietly, in a 
low voice. As stated earlier, it is better to do 
so in the same way, as giving 'Sadaqa' 
privily is superior to giving it openly. This 
will also not hinder others in saying their 
preyers. 

Reciting the Holy Book loudly is laudable only 
when the intention be noble and the situation be 
such that it would prompt others also to follow 
suit i.e. start reading the Holy Book or be 
intimated and exhorted by such recitation. 

Furthermore, reading from the Holy Book is 
better than mere oral recitation, because in 
reading from the Holy 'Qur'an' the eyes also get 
its ('Sawab') reward. Some people are even of 
the opinion that the ('Ajr') the reward of 
'Khatme Quraan' from the Holy Qur'an is seven 
times more than that of mere oral 'Khatme Pak' 
(concluding reading of the Holy Book) . 

Once, one of the 'Ulema' (Plural of 'Alim' i.e. a 
religious scholar) called on Hazrat Imam Shafai 
(Rahmatullah Alaih). They saw that he was in 
the state of 'Sajda' while the Holy Book was 
lying open, beside him. He remarked that "it 
appears that the 'Fiqa' (The "study and 
dispensation of Islamic jurisprudence) has kept 
you back, from the Holy Book." Imam Shafai 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) was least affected by this 
uncalled for aspersion and cooly replied that "I 
start reciting the Holy Qur'an after the 'Isha' 
(Night) prayers and remain awake all night." 



337 



It is related that once the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) went to the 
house of Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq (Allah be 
pleased with him) and saw him reciting from the 
Holy 'Qur'an' slowly in his prayer, at night. He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
enquired its reason from him. Hazrat Abu Bakr 
Siddiq (Allah be pleased with him) respectfully 
replied. "I am praying to Allah. He can hear 
even an inaudible voice." Then He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) went to the 
house of Hazrat Umar (Allah be pleased with 
him) and saw that he was saying his prayers 
and reciting from the Holy Qur'an at the top of 
his voice. To a similar question he replied "I do 
so to awaken those who are indolent and 
asleep. I also do so to harry the Devil. 
Thereupon the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) said "Both of 
you are right in your own way according to 
your intentions ('Niyyat') . 
Sixthly, the Holy Qur'an should be recited in a 
good, appealing voice. The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) has 
expressed His appreciation and said that the 
Holy Qur'an should be recited very attentively 
in an agreeable and heartsoothing voice. He, 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
once heard the 'Ghulam' (slave) of Hazrat Abu 
Huzaifa (Rahmatullah Alaih) reciting the Holy 
Qur'an in a gracefully pleasing voice and 
observed: 



338 



"All praise is to Allah who made in my 
Ummah a man like him (this man who 
recited the Holy Qur'an so well) ." 

Hence the better rendering of the recitation, the 
more effective will be its impact on the listener. 
Nevertheless it is undesirable ('Makrooh') to recite the 
Holy Qur'an with long and loud speech and concocted 
false connotations like the present day 'Qawwals' (The 
beat singers accompanied musical instruments). It 
should be remembered that it is the Holy Qur'an, the 
Book of Allah. It is speaking soothe. 

THE MYSTIQUE OF READING THE HOLY 
'QUR'AN' 

Like a hidden pearl in a shell, there are six 
principal mystiques of reading the Holy Book. 



Had We sent down this Qur'an on a 
mountain, thou wouldst have seen it 
humbled and split asunder, out of fear 
of Allah. (59:21) 

I. The man should sincerely appreciate its 
('Azmat') Greatness, viz:- 

A. It is Allah's Book. It contains His 
instructions. 



339 

B. It is ancient. The virtue of His Grandeur is 
inherent in it. 

C. It is manifest in itself by His Command. We 
read its words. Like the word 'fire'. We 
utter it easily by our tongue but when it 
comes to reading it in the Holy 'Qur'an', its 
depth of meaning is of such a singular 
magnitude, like other words of the Holy 
'Qur'an', that if it is revealed in its true 
grandeur and splendour, nothing in this 
universe would be able to withstand it, to 
say the least. That is why the Almighty 
Allah has Himself said:- 

The Allah wants to instruct and educate. Only 
He has the Supreme acumen to do so. As such 
he has so dressed up the words in the Holy 
Book, that in them He has most deftly and 
artistically concealed the Splendour and the 
Grandeur (Jamal-o-Jalal) of the Holy 'Qur'an' 
so that not only, the tongue and the heart of the 
man may be activated and fortified with it but 
also in order that the man may be able to 
broach it and be benefit from it. 

There is more to it than meets the eye. For 
example it was difficult for man to make better 
use of the animals by speech. He had to devise 
signs and symptoms. He is doing it since times 
immemorial as he has to deal with them and 
take work from these animals. But, whereas the 
animal obeys the man and does things for him 
according to this instructions, his intellect does 



340 



not go beyond it. For example oxen are 
deployed to till the land but they do not know 
its purpose. Same is the case with man. He 
recognises the superficial sounds and their 
ostensible meanings and nothing more. Some 
people mistakenly take the Qur'anic words and 
their sounds in the same way which is obviously 
wrong. Its implication can be best described by 
considering that the factum of the word 'Atish' 

(The fire) is that it comprises three small 
syllables viz 'Alif, Ta' and 'Sheen' only, not 
realising that the paper on which the word 
'Atish' i.e. the fire is written wijl not be abe to 
withstand it, i.e. the fire. 

Similarly, just as there is a soul for everybody, 
similarly the real meanings (implications), of 
words are also like their soul. As a matter of 
fact the words are mere structures and what is 
of the real essence is their grandeur and 
significance which lies essentially contained in 
them. 

The second most important thing to bear in 
mind before starting the recitation of the Holy 
'Qur'an' is that its reader should vividly 
remember that he is going to undertake a great 
assignment. He is going to recite from the Holy 
Qur'an, the most venerated and sacred Book of 
Allah. Allah the Almighty has said:- 



(V^ :4Niijll) 



ij^UJl Jl 'Lu>. tl 



341 



Which none but the purified touch. (56:79) 

The purity of body and soul are involved in it. 
Just as no one can dare to touch the Holy 
Qur'ah unless he is sure that he is bodily neat 
and clean, in the same manner its verity can 
only be understood when the 'Botin' or soul of 
the man is also clean. 

It is said that Hazrat Akrama (Allah be pleased 
with him) used to have a faint as soon as he 
used to open the Holy Book to read it and used 
to say that It is 'Kalamae Rabbi' the Book of My 
Allah. To be aware is to be mindful. Only those 
persons can revere and venerate the Holy Book 
commensurate with its loftiness who worship 
Allah with thin heart and soul and think of His 
Magnificience, of the seven stratas of the 
Heaven and earth, of the 'Arsh', of the 'Kursi', 
the angels, the Doomsday, the creation of all 
that is in the universe man, animals, birds, 
beasts, the vegatation, the space, the stars till 
we can not count or recollect His All 
Encompassing Powers and Jurisdiction. There is 
no limit to it. From Him have we all come and 
unto Him shall we all return. 

Thirdly the man reciting the Holy Qur'an should 
make sure that:- 

A. During his ('Tilawat') recitation his heart 
should be submerged in it. 

B. He should not allow the shallow and 
sensual thoughts to interfere with hv ^ccital. 



342 



C. He should consider 'as not read' that 
portion of his recitation which he may have 
passed over casually in neglect or in 
preoccupation with other thoughts. It is 
better that he recites it again with profound 
dedication. To carelessly do so, is like 
visiting a beautiful garden with many 
wondorous things, fountains of spring and 
sweet smelling flower beds in it and coming 
back from it without having relished any of 
them. Such a person is very unfortunate 
and irresponsible indeed who gets such rare 
opportunities and does not avail them. 

IV. The fourth things is that he should concentrate 
on the meaning of each word so that he may 
be able to understand them. If he can not do so 
the first time, he should try again. Rather than 
do a lot of recitation, it is better to try and grasp 
whatever he has been able to read intelligently 
and soulfully. According to Hazrat Abu Zar 
Ghaffari (Allah be pleased with him) recite the 
following verse repeatedly in the 'Namaz':- 

(UA.SofcJI) O^J»j;>J» 

If Thou chastisest them, they are Thy 
servants, and if Thou forgivest them, Thou 
art the Mighty, the Wise. (5:118) 

Hazrat Abu Zar Ghaffari (Allah be pleased with him) 
has also said that he has also heard the Holy Prophet 



343 



(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) repeat 
'Bismillah' (With the Name of Allah) unto twenty times, 
whereas as per Hazrat Saeed Bin Jabair (Allah be 
pleased with him) once he saw the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) spent the 
whole night in vehemently repeating the following line 
from 'Soorae Yaseen'. 

And today get yourselves apart, O 
criminals! (36:59) 

It is also argued that it is being unfaithful to the interest 
and interpretation of a verse, if while reading it, the 
reciter of the Holy Book may be at the same time 
dwelling on the next verse withojnt having grasped its 
meanings first. 

An anecdote ('Hikayat') has been quoted that 
Hazrat Amir Bin Abdulbh (Rahmatullah Alaih) used to 
speak a lot about 'Wasawis' (Plural of Waswasa" Stray 
reflections, conjectures and forebodings) in 'Namaz' 
(Prayer). People enquired about its status from him. 
He replied that 'rather than be beset by them in 
prayers I would rather have some one gash me with a 
kinfe. If this is the state of my presence before my 
Lord and Master, then how can I face Him oh the Day 
of Judgement?" Therefore it is imperative for the 
'Qur'an Khawri' to exclude all else from his mind than 
the humble service of Allah and the context of what he 
is reciting submissively before Him. 



344 



The person reciting from the Holy Book should 
also be particularly alert while reading the great 
qualities of Allah and or His Great Names like 
'Quddoos* (of Great Magnificience: One of the Great 
Names of Allah the Glorious), 'Aziz' (Overpowering: 
one of the Great Names of Allah) and 'Jabbar' (The 
Stringent enforcer: Allah the powerful who can inflict 
punishment). Like, when he reads the following line, 
he should ponder over it. 

I; if '^j> j b\ * jiJw >*> j oj^ji uii j&. 

"Allah created the Heaven and the Earth 
with truth. Verily, there is surely a sign for 
those who believe." (29 : 44) 

His concentration should be deep and singularly 
directed to what he is reciting. He should forget 
everything else. For instance when he comes to the 
following line his thoughts should be totally converged 
on his humble beginnings from a drop of water to what 
he is today, a person having human infrastructure and 
organs like the flesh, skin, veins, bones and other parts 
of his anatomy, 'each having a distinct and complicated 
role to play for him by the Grace of Allah. 

We created Man from a mingled sperm 
drop;,then.... (76 . 2) 

There are three kinds of people who can not be 
expected to know the meanings of the Holy 'Qur'an'. 



The person who does not know Arabic and is 



345 



also not aware of its Tafseer (The details: 
Detailed interpretation) . 
ii) A person whose soul may have darkened due 
to:- 

A. Constant indulgence in some heinous Sin. 

B. Misleading diversive thoughts of evil design 
and 'Bidaat' (Act or belief contrary to 
approved customary or stipulated rule) . 

(iii) A follower of erroneous doctrine and fake 
beliefs. Such a person is a diehard, igotted ill- 
believer. He is not amenable to dicipline.. He 
learns the 'Ilmul Kalam' (Debating) only to 
propogate his prejudiced and malafied opinions 
contrary to the basic elements of Islam. 

(iv) The heart of the person reciting the Holy 
Qur'an should be receptive to the nature of 
'Ayate Mubaraka' (The Holy verses) he recites. 
For example: 

1. When he reads such an 'Ayat' where the 
dread or danger of any kind is expressed, 
there should be consequent fear in his 
heart. 

2. When he recites 'Ayate Rehmat', his heart 
should be overjoyed. 

3. When he comes to the Great Characteristics 
of Allah he should become humility and 
submissiveness personified. 

4. When he arrives at the 'Ayat' depicting the 
evil convictions of the idolators and the 
atheists, he should lower his voice and head 
in feeling a sense of shame on their 



346 



profanity. 



(v) 



Lastly, one should recite the Holy Qur'an 
attentively, thinking that Allah is listening to 
him. When he does so, he needs nothing more 
to qualify him for this singular honour. 

'ZIKR-E-ILAHI': THE REMEMBRANCE AND 
WORSHIP OF ALLAH 

The essence (the 'Rooh') of all worhsio 
ncluding the stipulated prayers lies in Hfe 
remembrance and in dutiful service to Hta, as 
ordained in the Holy Book. ' 



(to .Oj^i) 



The Prayer forbids indecency and 
repugnant things; and Allah's 
remembrance is greater, (29 : 45) 

IZT'^u redtati0n of th€ H oIy 'Qur'an' is 

I ah (The Di 6 ^ T*" ™** 88 " 

Him « ? ? rSe ° f A,lahK ft remind * *• man of 

Him. It is also the source of His Sublime guidance to 

rXds" ^ eXhl,irat,nS ^ ° f - S£ 



" ^ evcr > the Purpose of (W) fasting is to 
eradicate the^ menace of lust and licentiousness root 

from z i uch dwe,Hn9 d °»™«y * «-ef 

from the soul, the heart becomes the sanctuary of 



347 



Allah. The prime mystique of 'Ha]' is the fulfilment of 
the burning desire in the faithful to visit the 'House of 
Allah' and pay his most profound respects to its owner, 
who is also the owner of the entire universe. This call 
depicts the yearning of man to be the nearest to Him 
in his unsatiated adoration of Allah. 

Hence, Summum bonum, the 'Zikr' of Allah is 
of the essence. The 'Kalama-e-Tayyaba' ('La Ilaha 
Illullah') is the root of Islam. In extolling the unity and 
univalence of Allah lies His supreme 'Zikr*. Verily, the 
verity of His nearness is the culmination point of the 
glory of man. Glory be to Allah who grants it to man 
in kind mercy when he negates and nullifies all else 
from his heart except the love and worship of Allah. It 
is in the Holy Qur'an thafc- 

( > o t : ijV l) ••• 'J)j> 

So remember Me, and I will remember 
you.... (2 : 152) 

Hence the ('Falah') betterment of man lies in 
His perpetual worship and obedience. 

( > . : J***Jl) 'ii'ydis 'flit <}g \ j 

And remember Allah much that you may 
succeed. (62 : 10) 

That is why Allah has praised His servants who revere 
and remember Him standing, sitting and reclining, 
exceedingly. 



348 



(Ml :i)j*s. Jfj 

Who remember Allah, standing and sitting 
and pn their sides.... (3:191) 

^n^ ,,ah ^ f mphaSiS6d ° n — eHng Him 

And remember thy Lord in thyself 
humbly and fearfully, and without being 
loud in voice, at the mornings and 
evenings, and be not among the heedless. 

(7 : 205) 

When people once asked the Holy Prophet 
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) of the 
lasting virtue of man. He replied. "It is ('Zikr Ilahf) 
remembrance of Allah on the lips of a dying man » 

unnn^l ff fr ^ ^ <* Allah be 

upon him) added. Let me tell you something. 

A. Which is best of all and accepted as such 

IV!, be f r L than 9ivin 9 silver and gold in 
(Sadaqa') charity. 

C It is better than 'Jehad' in the battle field 

It is to remember, worship Allah with every fibre 
of ones being I.e. with one's heart and soul. TheToly 



349 



Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
clarified that a person who does so, reaches the status 
whereupon he is singularly blessed by Allah. 

A. He is like the living amongst the dead. 

B. He is like an evergreen tree as compared to dry 
grass. 

C. He is like the valiant in Jehad and against the 
absconder. 

D. His unsaid wishes (due to his being engrossed in 
worship) are granted more and sooner than the 
solicited prayers of others. 

According to Hazrat Ma'az Bin Jabal 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) "that moment is considered as lost 
by the venerated saints (who have been promised 
Paradise by Allah) which is not spent in the 
remembrance of Allah." 

THE FACTS ABOUT «ZIKR* - REMEMBRANCE 
OF ALLAH 

The 'Zikr' is of four kinds. 

I. The first kind is elementary viz in it the ('Zikr') 
remembrance of Allah is with the tongue only 
but the heart remains negligent and non- 
participant. 

A. Such 'Zikr' has its effect as the tongue 
remains vocal but it is rather infitisimal. 

B. Nevertheless it is much better than the 
tongue partaking in frivolous talk, instead. 



350 



II 



III 



In the second category the ('Zikr') remembrance 
of Allah is with the heart but it is of. a transitory 
nature; rather sporadic, not imbued in the heart 
requiring intermittent efforts to be rigorous it to 
overcome its tendency to become dormant and 
disrespectful again. 

Things are different in the third kind of 'Zikr' 
This is a blessed state. In it the love of Allah 
becomes so engrained in the heart that one has 
to strive hard to divert it to othar considerations 
that may be necessary, at times. It reverts back 
to throbbing in the adoration of Allah again 
IV. The fourth kind is the most exalted of them all 
In this class the devoted heart of the ardent 
admirer of Allah becomes so engrossed with His 
love that he becomes 'adoration of Allah 
personified'. So much so that he forgets 
everything other than His Adored. He remains 
so absorbed in His worship that he even forgets 
that he is worshipping and venerating Him He 
becomes akin to the 'Marafat' of Allah. Nothing 
else matters to him the least. He rises above all 
voluntary considerations of 'Bondagf, as such 
He forgets himself in his perpetual devotion and 
dutifulness to Allah. His («Husf) being becomes 
devoid of everything other than the Almighty 
Allah, hence the rest becomes 'Neest' non- 
existent for him. 

•♦u a!! 1 ^ UniQUe C ° nditi5n of com P ,ete conjugation 
with Allah he calls out ('Harna Oost') that there is 
nothing else than Him. That only He is there and 
nothmg else exists. This is the first stage of his union 



351 



A. At this stage he becomes angei like 

B. Allah starts liking him. He gets the respect of 
this world and the Hereafter. 

C. Allah starts bestowing him with extraordinary 
qualities and favours. 

D. Unique things are revealed to him. 

E. He dwells physically in this material world but 
his soul soars upto unprecedent heights of 
glory. He starts seeing 'the unseen' by the 
others. 

F. Some people think that he is insane but 
Providence laughs at them, when they see such 
abnormal deeds get performed from him that 
they remain wonderstruck. 

This is the real elixir of blessings. However, the 
people of this field should not be discouraged if 
miraculous acts of this kind do not occur at their 
hands, of necessity; as it can happen that despite their 
enlightenment some of them may not be endowed 
with such characteristics by the Will of Allah. At times, 
such 'Asfia' (Plural of Soofi: A venerated saint 
absorbed in singular worship of Allah) attain such 
attributes after their death. 

In nutshell, the key to reach the status of the 
blessed lies in the following: - 

A. To affirm the right and countermand the evil. 

B. To awaken the heart and venerate and worship 
Allah whole heartedly. 

C. To remain engrossed in His reverence 
continuously. 

D. The rewards will come automatically. To adore 



352 



Allah for the love of Him only. 
E. To always remain alert that the Satan does not 
bring the man's downfall by making him 
arrogant of his worship. 

That is why the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said that "Anyone 
who desires to stroll in the Gardens of Paradise should 
remember Allah (Do His 'Zikr') excessively with his 
heart and soul." 

THE 'TASBEEH', TAHLIL', SALATE ASTAGHFAR 
AND THEIR BENEFITS 



The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said:- 



That each act of man will be weighed in a 
'Balance' on the Day of Judgement but as 
regards in Tahlil i.e. the factum of *La Ila Ha 
Mullah' (There is no god but Allah) is that if it 
is placed in a balance, it will be overweighted all 
that is in the seven stratas of the heaven and 
earth." 

"That if a person is on the right and proclaims 
this 'Kalima' (A veritable statement), he will be 
absolved of all his sins." 

"That a person who recites it with full conviction 
and lives upto its merit, he will be sent to 
Paradise." 



353 

"There is no god save Allah, the Only the 
One, There is no partner with Him. To 
Him belong the Sovereignty and to Him 
belong all Praise and He is Powerful/Able 
to do every thin." 

D. "That if a person recites it a hundred times a 
day, he will get its (Sawaab) reward equivalent 
to setting ten slaves free and 

a) A hundred good deeds done would be 
added to the credit sheet of his good 
performance. 

b) Also a hundred bad deeds committed by 
him will be written off from his record of 
evil performance." 

E. "That if recited at night, it will serve as a 
protective wall against all dangers, in its 
darkness." 

It is also in the 'Santo Bukhari* ('Hadith' of the 
Bukhari origin) that a person who recites it, will get the 
reward equal to having set four slaves of the 
descendents of Hazrat Ismael (Prophet Samuel) (peace 
of Allah be upon him), free. 

"TASBEEH-O-TAHMEED" 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said:- 



354 

"That a person who says the following ('Hamd') Praise 
of Allah hundred times a day, all his sins will be 
pardoned :- 

"There is no god save Allah, the Only the 
One, He has no partner. To Him belongs 
all sovereignty and to Him belong all 
Praise.' And He is Able to do all things." 

"That a person who recites as under, daily all his sins 
will be forgiven:- 

(i) 'Subhan Allah' 33 Times 

(ii) 'Alhamdu Lillah' 33 Times 
(Hi) 'Allah-o-Akbar' 34 Times 

(iv) The following (Full text) once (to complete the 
rosary of 100) . 

It is stated that once a down and out person in 
straitened circumstances came to the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) and 
humbly said. "Oh, Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him), the entire world seems to have 
cast me asunder. I am facing aweful circumstances of 
poverty, helplessness and shame. Kindly come to my 
rescue and let me know what to do?" He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) answered. "Are you 
unaware of the following 'rosary' of the angels and 
some other beings who get their livelihood due to its 
recitation?" He respectfully asked "What is it?" The 



355 

Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) said. 

"Glory be to Allah and all Praise is to Him. 
Glory be to Allah, the Great Allah Praise 
is to Him. I seek forgiveness of Allah." 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) asked him to recite it a hundred times 
before the morning daily and gave him the glad tidings 
"that thereafter the world would become attentive 
towards you. From every word of it Allah will create 
an angel who would be saying a rosary to Allah, till the 
Day of Judgement. You will get its reward. It is one of 
the 'Baqiatus Salihat* (Eternal verity of blessing). 

"Glory be to Allah and all Praise is to Him. 
Glory be to Allah, the Great. Allah Praise 
is to Him. I seek forgiveness of Allah." 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) said:- 

(i) "That I recite it Myself. These words are dearer 
to me than all things in the world on which, the 
sun shines." 

(«) "That two of its 'Kalimas' (Given hereunder) are 



356 



easy to utter but they would be vey weighty in 
the Balance (On the Day of Judgement) and 
Allah Almighty likes them very much. 

/(jlory be to Allah and all Praise is 
to Him. Glory be to Allah, the Most Great. 

It is stated that some poor and the needy asked 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) "What is to become of us poor as we say 
our prayers, so do the rich but they can give 'Sadaqa 
and Zakat' (charity). Hence it appears that they are 
better placed than us?" The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) replied, "Your 
Tasbeeh', Tahiti' and Takbir' are your ('Sadaqa') 
charity on account of your being in the state of want 
and destitution. So is your asserting the good and 
warding off of evil. So much so that in such a 
condition of dire want and poverty even if you are able 
to put a morsel of food in the mouth of your wife 
when she is hungry, it is a 'Sadaqa'." 

At the same time you should realise that just as 
a seed planted in fertile land grows more quickly and 
produces much better harvest, the prayers and the 
Tasbeeh-o-Tahlil' of a 'Darvesh' (A pious person) is 
comparatively more effective and productive. 



THE DAROOD SHARIF (SALUTATIONS, 
PRAYERS AND BLESSINGS IN REVERENCE TO 



357 



THE HOLY PROPHET (PEACE AND BLESSINGS 
OF ALLAH BE UPON HIM) 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) looked very pleased as he came out of 
this house, one day. He said that the Arch angel 
Gabriel had called on him and had conveyed a blissful 
message of Allah the Benificient, to wit would it not 
please you :- 

(i) If I reward that person from your 'Ummat' 
(Followers) ten times with My blessings who 
may send his Darood on you once? 

(ii) If I send My Blessed greetings ten times on that 
person from your 'Ummat' who may send his 
'Salaam* (Salutations) on you once? 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) added:- 

A. "That a person who sends his Darood on me, 
the angels send their salutations for him." 

B. "That a person who sends his 'Darood' for me, 
the reward of ten good deeds is written in his 
record book, simultaneously the equivalent of 
ten misdeeds performed by him are deleted 
from it." 

C. "That if a person pens down something with My 
name in it, with 'Darood-o-Salaam' on Me, as 
long as My Name remains there, the angels will 
keep on praying for the forgiveness of the sins 
of that man." 

D. "The more 'Darood-o-Salaam' a person sends" 



358 

on me, the more he will be eligible to my 
nearness." 

THE ASTAGHFAAR' 

Hazrat Abdullah bin Masood (Allah be pleased 
with him) has said that if a sinner sincerely repents 
after an evil deed is committed by him and recites the 
following two verses ('Ayat-e-Mubaraka*) from the Holy 
Book in 'Astaghfaar' (Begging pardon of Allah), he 
would be forgiven. v 

& \:& '^m jt \-p & '^i j . 

(>r»:£>^j<) o £>jl£4 J»* j U J* 

And who, when they commit an 
indecency, or wrong themselves, 
remember Allah and pray for forgiveness 
of their sins-and ,who forgives the sins 
except* Allah-and they do not knowingly 
persist in what they did. (3:135) 

The other one is 

TV 

Whoso does evil, or wrongs himself, then 
prays forgiveness of Allah, he shall find 
Allah "Forgiving, Merciful. (4 : 110) 



359 

And Allah the Merciful has also ordained. 

Celebrate the praise of thy Lord, and seek 
His forgiveness.... (110:3) 

Accordingly, the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) used to say, often :- 

- ^ *»js» 

"Glory be to Thee O Allah, and al! Praise 
is to Thee. O Allah Pardon me. Verily, 
Thou art the Oft-Returning, the Most 
Merciful," 

The Holy Propeht (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has specified that- 

A. "That to ask forgiveness of sins from Allah is so 
consoling that after a person has said 
'Astaghfaar' (Begging pardon of Allah) he feels 
relieved and refreshed and Allah showers 
(•Rizq') His Mercy on him by providing him with 
abundant means of livelihood from unexpected 
and inconcievable sources. He added (peace 
an,d blessings of Allah be upon him) that I do so 
seventy times in a day myself." 

Let us wake up. If the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) did so, it should 



360 



be an everlasting lesson for us to follow in his 
holy footsteps. 

B. "If a person recites (the following 'Astaqfaar') it 
thrice before going to sleep Allah will pardon 
him of his trangressipns even if they be 
equivalent to the teeming foam of a river, or 
widely expansive Sana's of the "desert or be 
muhipresent like the leaves of the trees or for 
that matter be equal to the incalculable days of * 
the world. Moreso, if the penitent says two 
'Rakaats' of 'Namaz' after taking a bath or 
proper abolutions, before doing so." 

"I seek forgiveness of Allah who is — there 
is no god but He, the Ever Living, the 
Ever subsisting." 

THE "ADAAB" OF "DUA" 

There is a certain etiquette in beseeching Allah 
in praying for one's wishes for the good of this world 
and the hereafter. In doing so the humble entreaty to 
Allah is of the essence. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has elucidated that the 
intrinsic virtue of worship lies in the salient prayers 
made to Allah, for, the very purpose of His reverence 
is in the expression of the man's helplessness and 
absolute dependence upon Him for every thing. Hence 
when the man speaks the truth most fervently, realises 
his utter inability to have or do anything without His 



361 



Grace and lauds His Graciousness, in profound 
servitude he stands at the helm of having his prayers 
granted by Allah's Divine Mercy on His supplicant 
servant. Hence the more solicitous and earnestly 
imploring he is, the sooner and the more he is likely to 
be rewarded. - 

The following eight prominent points about the 
making and acceptance of ('Dua') prayers to the 
Almighty Allah are recounted here. 

1. The 'Dua' is more meritorious in the following 
('Mubarak') blessed days. 

« 

A. 'Yome Urfa' (The Day of 'Haj'). 

B. The .'Ramadan' (The holy month of fasting) . 

C. The early morning. 

D. The middle of the night. 

2. The time and occasion when prayers become 
more sacred, e.g., 

E. For the 'Ghazi' (The fighter for the faith) in 
the battle field. 

F. The hour of welcome showers. 

G. The time of saying the prescribed essential 
('Farz Namaz') prayers. 

H. The intermediary time portion between the 
('Azaan') call for prayers and ('Takbir') 
starting prescribed prayers by saying ('Allah- 
o-Akbar') Allah is Great. 

I. The state of ('Roza') fasting; 

Special blessings of Allah descend on the 



362 



worshipper at these occasions. 

3. The person saying the 'Dua' prayers for their 
acceptance should first raise his hands aloft in 
earnest entreaty. After having made his wish he 
should replace his hands reverently over his 
face and say 'Amen'. This gesture reaffirms his 
faith thereby:- 

(i) Either his prayer would be granted. 

(ii) Or something good, to his benefit would 
occur soon. 

(iii) Or his sins would be forgiven, as stated in 
the 'Hadith'. 

(iv) Fourthly the man praying, the person 
beseeching Allah that his desire may be 
fulfilled, should have no misgivings in his 
heart. He should have full faith in Allah that 
his prayer would be granted. 

"Pray Allah while ye have full certitude of 
its acceptance." 

(v) The fifth decorum is that the prayer should 
.be made most fervently. It is in the 'Hadith 
Sharif that the prayer of an ( i GhafiO in 
attentive and negligent heart is not granted. 

(vi) Sixthly, the 'Dua' should be persistent and 
perpetual. A man in distress likes to speak 
his heart out in seeking help i.e. pray 
pleadingly over and over again. To pray 
halfheartedly and listlessly after having 
prayed for long and saying to one's self 



363 



'that these is not much use in praying, as 
my prayers are not being granted' is not 
• good. The merit lies in not giving up. What 
else can man do than not pray and that 
also to the one and only who can grant his 
wishes. It is the only course. In it lies his 
welfare, as noone knows the hour of 
acceptance of his prayers. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has said: 

. ObJllaJt is! tsjMi UjJl 4l) UJl 

"All Praise is to Allah, with His favour the 
virtues become perfect." 

Rather than be disheartened in case of delay in the 
approval of his wishes the man should say. 

* . - J* 'Jr > jj j^Ji 

"All Praise is to Allah in every state." 

(vii) The seventh decorum of good grace is that 
before asking for his wish ('Dua') the man 
should :- 

"Glory be to Allah, My Lord, the High, the 
Most, the Grantor." 

(i) Extol the Purity and Grandeur of Allah. 

(ii) Seek this forgiveness of his sins and 



364 



solecism. 

(iii) Then send his reverent 'Darood and 
Salaam' on the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him). 

(iv) Utter the following most devoutly and 
pray. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) has said that 'Darood 
Sharif confers specific verisimilitude to the 
prayer sought, since it is also a prayer 
favourite to Allah for His Bountiful Blessings 
on the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him). Hence, anything 
asked with it obtains a marked preference 
over normal prayers. 

(viii) The eighth decorum of 'Dua' is that 
(Tauba Astghfar'j the repentance of sins 
and resolve to relent from them mast 
precede the prayer. The prayers are 
generally not heard due to 

A. The neglect or frivolity in the heart. 

B. The darkness of the sins in the heart. 

t 

" Hazrat Ka'abul Akhbar (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
has related that during the period of 'Bant 
Israil', the Prophet ('Moosa' peace of Allah 
be upon him) Moses went to say ('Namaz-e- 
Istisqa') special prayers with his followers, 
thrice to pray to Allah to grant His kind 
Mercy on them as they were suffering in an 



365 



acute state of famine. But his prayers were 
not granted. He was informed by Vahi' 
(Special Instruction and ordination by Allah) 
that these prayers were not granted because 
of the presence of a backbiter and mischief 
mongering person in the congregation. It is 
related that thereupon Prophet Musabegged 
Allah to name and identify that person so 
that he may exclude him in their prayers. It 
is said that he was informed by Allah that 
"How do you expect Me to do which I 
abhor and forbid." Thereupon the Prophet 
'Moosa' is reported to have collected all of 
them together and asked them to seek 
forgiveness from Allah against this heinous 
evil. They did so and instantaneously the 
welcome rain showers ('Barane Rehmat') 
started pouring on them. Similarly Hazrat 
Malik Bin Dinar (Rahmatullah Alaih) is also 
stated to have gone out to say 
congregational prayers ("Namaze Istisqa") 
for rain with people but it was not accepted 
and he was told "you have come out to 
make these prayers with people quite a few 
of whom are bodily purified, their bellies are 
full of illegitimate food ('Male Haram') and 
their hands are gruesomety bloody (i.e. 
they are tyrants). How can you expect such 
prayers to be granted?" 

SOME EFFECTIVE (DUA'S) PRAYERS FOR 
MERCY 



Various effecitve prayers ('Dua-e-Masoora') 



366 



have been collected for the benefit of the reader. Some 
of them are 'Sunnaf. Quite a few such 'Du'a' have also 
been assorted and complied in the "Ihya 'Ulum al-Din". 
Some of these Du'a are very famous and those are 
mentioned in the book Badayah al-Hidayah. May Allah 
bless you in your prayers (Aameen). However it is worth 
repeating that the essence of the prayer lies in asking 
earnestly, -in entreating humbly and imploring Allah most 
beseechingly to grant his wish by accepting his 'Du'a' in 
His kind Mercy on His servant. 

- 4M< 5y if ) 'J> d 

"In the name of Allah. My Lord! I seek 
refuge to Thee from that I should go astray 
or I am misguided or I opress or I am 
opressed, or I ignore or I am ignored. In 
the name of Allah the Beneficent the 
Merciful. There is no might and no power 
except in Allah." 

The following 'Du'a' should be said while 
entering a mosque (by putting ones Right foot first). 

u O Allah! Send blessings on Muhammad 
and on his Family and also 
Salutations/peace. O Allah! Forgive me 
my sins ancl open for me the doors of Thy 
Mercy." 



367 

The following 'Dua' will become the ('Kaffara') 
paying in penance of that unfortunate person who has 
to sit in frivolous company per force majeure. 

cii til *Jl d b\ 'xfo jtfJUiw j J$Ji 'Ji\^L, 
. CJI Ul <-» jiJJl jib U Ajl J^li 

"Glory is to Thee, O Allah! And All Praise 
is to Thee. I bear witness that there is no 
god save Thou. I seek forgiveness from 
Thee and I return unto Thee. I did wrong 
and I committed injustice to myself. So 
forgive me. Verily, the truth is that no one 
can forgive sins except Thou alone." 

At the time of going to the ('Bazaar') market 
place one should recite this prayer 

aUJi a j W\ a ii a Mi- j & di *Ji a 

J* 3 ^ ^J+t U <f 3* 3 ^-^i 3 jfH 

"There is no god save Allah, the Only, the 
One. There is no partner unto Him. AH 
' Sovereignty belongs to Him and All Praise 
belongs to Him.He gives life and He gives 
death. In His Hand is all excellence and 
He is Able to do every thing." 

At the time of wearing new clothes this prayer is 
effective. 

ja dUL^i .u»Ji jjui ^>p\ iju» cji 
u r" 3 fj* of **>.*3** 3 *» Cr* u 3 f 



368 



"O Allah! Thou hast caused me to were 
this garment. So All Praise is to Thee. I ask 
Thee of its good and the good for which it 
has been made and I seek refuge with 
thee from its evil and the evil for which it is 
made." 

At the sighting of the new moon this prayer 
should be said. 

.vLjJi j aiiLli j aC^\ j otf i» ^ 

"O Allah! Make it (the Crescent) to arise 
on us with peace and faith and security 
and Islam. O (crescent)! Thy Lord and my 
Lord is Allah." 

At the time of a storm, the following Dua 
should be recited. 

J *l u r 1 j V *il<Aj*J j *< cJL-jt u 

*■ * * * 

"O Allah! I ask Thee, the excellence of this 
wind and the excellence that is in it and 
the excellence with which it has been sent 
and we seek refuge with Thee from its evil 
and the evil that is in it and the evil with 
which it has been sent." 



At the time of hearing about the woeful demise 
of a person, the following prayer should be made. 



369 

"Glorified is the Ever Alive who is the one 
who never dies. Verily, we are from Allah 
and Verily, to Him we are to return." 

The following 'Dua' should be said at the time 
of giving charity. 

Our Lord, accept from us; Thou art the 
Hearing, the Knowing. (2 : 127) 

At the time of suffering a loss one should say. 
Jj^j Uo J) UJ \j+ Ob & b, ^ 

It may be that our Lord will give us better 
in exchange than it; we humbly turn to 
our Lord. (68 : 32) 

At the time of starting something new the 
following prayer should be earnestly recited. 

C&j uy i 'ja ill 'J^'j i^-'j iiijj 'jf bi 
( \ . : J^S\) 

Our Lord, give us mercy from Thee, and 
furnish us with rectitude in our affair. 

(18 : 10) 

At the time of casting one's eyes towards the 
horizon, the following prayer should be recited. 

iJy jUl L>& bji dJbw U bj 



370 

(■V > : 01* & 

Blessed be He who has set constellations 
in the! heaven, and has set a lamp and an 
illuminating moon in it. (25 : 61) 

When it thunders, the following prayer is 
effective. 

£ f^sT # J ^> £r-i J 

(^:V J J») 

The thunder proclaims His praise, and 
also the angels, in awe of Him.... (13 : 13) 

If the lightning falls at a place, this prayer 
should be said: 

"O Allah! By The blessing we may not be 
killed and we. may not be destroyed by 
Thy Punishment. Grant us security before 
such an eventuality." 

When it rains, the following 'Dua' should be 

said: 

il^ri j uiu t* j & {£, ate, ^ 

"O Allah! Make it a pleasant water stock 
and useful rainfall and make it cause of 
Thy Mercy and do not make it cause of 
Thy Punishment." 

When one is angry and annoyed, the following 
'Dua' should be said: 



. 371 

Of 'sty J 'Jl 'viil j ^ ^ ^ 

"Q Allah! Forgive my of my sin and 
remove the wrath of my heart and save 
me from the Satan, the out cast." 

In case of extreme fear and awe, one should 
recite the following prayer. 

"O Allah! We seek Thy refuge from their 
evil and put Thou in their necks." 

In case of ache at any spot of one's body the 
man should place his hand there, recite 'Bismillah 
Sharif thrice and say the following 'Dua' seven times. 

" jk» li> 4JjOS j aJuu 1>T 

"I seek refuge with Allah and His Power 
from the evil that I feel and an afraid of it." 

One should recite the following in anguish. 

- fo^t L>j j L>j ^ji ill jjj j ^3, 

"There is no god save Allah, the Most 
High, the Great. The is no god save 
Allah, the Lord of the Great Throne, There 
is no god save Allah, the Lord of the 
heavens and the Most Honoured Throne." 



372 

If one gets stuck with a thing, becomes 
helplessly weary, the following prayer should be recited 
most devotedly. 

- j** J jjjf 3 

"O Allah! I am Thy servant and the son of 
Thy servant and the son of Thy mate, and 
in Thy Hand is my forelock: and in Thy 
Hand are my past (things). Thy order is 
enforced upon me. Thy decree is for me. I 
implore Thee with each name with which 
Thou hast named thyself or which Thou 
hast revealed in Thy Book, or Thou hast 
taught some one of Thy creation or 
selected him in the un seen knowledge 
near Thee to make the Qur'an the 
fountain of my heart and the light of my 
breast and the dispeller of my grief and 
remover of my anxieties and my cares." 

The following 'Dua' should be recited at the 
time of seeing in the mirror. 

J 'Jfe cr*& 'J$* h '«u^J' 

"All praise is for Allah who created me. So 
how excellent is my creation and He 
fashioned me. So how excellent is my 



373 

* 

fashioning." 

At the time of purchasing a slave one should 
handle his hair and pray. 

• & Jf V J *j* Of 

"O Allah! Verily, I ask Thee the excellence 
of it and the excellence of its instinct and I 
seek refuge to Thee from its evil and the 
evil of its instinct." 

The following prayer should be recited at the 
time of going to sleep. 

"O my Lord! In Thy name, I put down my 
side and in Thy name I raised it up. This is 
my soul. Thou hast caused him to sleep. 
Its life and death is in Thy control. If Thou 
withhold it, forgive it, and if thou release 
it, protect it with that with which Thou 
protect Thy righteous servant." 

On waking up from sleep one should utter these 
prayers. 

jjUt $\ j u ui u a* uy>i Alt 4JJ ju^Ji 

jus- ■; j f JLjJi Jp jj i^Sflt j s >Jt 



374 



"All praise is for Allah who made us alive 
after having made us to die and to Him is 
the Final recollection. We have got up at 
Dawn and the Kingdom got up at Dawn 
for Allah, and all authority and greatness is 
for Allah; and all honour and all power is 
for Allah. We enter the Dawn on true 
nature of Islam and Article of sincerity 
(formula of monotheism*) and the Religion 
of our Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) and 
on the creed (Millat). Ibrahim (peace be 
upon him), who was upright (hanif) and 
not one of the polytheists." 

SAYING THE ROSARY: REPERTOIRE 

ROSARIUS 

■* 

We have already discussed the issue in the 
chapter on 'Musalmani' and at many 'places hitherto. 
After all, what is man but a mere handful of dust. His 
very genesis is very humble. The man was created out 
of a drop of water - a sperm. So, there is not much 
that he can boast of. It is only when the sparkling gem 
of the soul becomes resplendent with its virtuosity par 
excellence that the glory associated with the concept of 
man is lent to it. The soul itself pertains to 
unidentifiable lofty realms of celestial spheres from 
where it originates. It reverts hack there but not before 
it has been instrumental in obtaining a lofty status for a 
person worthy of it. 



375 



By the Age. Man. is surely in loss, except 
those who believe and do righteous 
deeds, and counsel each other to the 
truth, and counsel each other to patience. 

(103 : 1-3) 

In journeying through this world, in his 
enterprise and trading for the hereafter, the man's life 
is like his capital, which keeps on decreasing with the 
passage of time as he marches indefatigebly onwards, 
while his assets of what he has gone in for viz his good 
deeds keep on piling up, until after the final count 
down of time of his allotted breaths ultimately he finds 
himself la»>( 3d back in is home country of the 
'Akhirat? 

His acute pain is however happily cast off after 
his laborious travels; when he sees the excellent 
merchandise worth far more than the value of gold 
and silver, that he has been successful in accumulating 
enroute, with the blessings of Allah. It is then that he 
realises that he has done well to not to have wasted his 
time in idle pursuits in his sojourn. He is glad that his 
ex post facto collection of ('Naikies') rarities of 
invaluable virtue of ('Aurado Wazaif) the holy rosaries 
day and night have stood him iri good stead. He 
realises that he will now get rich rewards of his 
merchandise for which he has strived so hard. 

Summum bonum the whole thing boils down to 
doing the maximum good and steadfastly averting the 
bad. Tinged with the love of Allah the status of man 
becomes like that of the worthy alchemist, the master 
of much cherished 'Chyma'. Hence, the secret of such 



376 



accomplishment lies in remaining constantly occupied 
in the ('Zikr o Fikr') remembrance of Allah and in 
doing so, making it a point to follow His dictates. It 
precludes the man from the depravity of soul, of the 
carnal desires and the lust of greedy things of this 
world. 

There are two distinct ways of doing so viz:- 

(i) The heart of man should remain throbbing in 
the adoration of Almighty by saying 'Allah', 
'Allah' all the time (The tongue should be 
silent). The man's heart should remain so 
engrossed in His 'Zikr', in his rememberance 
that he should forget all else save Allah; he 
should even not remain aware that it is doing 
so. The Satan is very unmerciful. He can cause 
his down fall by pumping up his ego with 'Ria\ 
the insolent pride that "Now I have become a 
holy man worth the salt as my heart remains in 
Allah's Cyad') rememberance perpetually." 

The man's total absorption in the 'Mushahida-e- 
Rabbani i.e. the 'Ma'rfat' of Allah is the status of glory 
of man. In his transcendence to the zenith of the 
nearness to Allah lies his grandeur of being the 
'Ashraful Makhlooqat'. But it is a very arduous task to 
achieve this pedestal, more so, as it entails remaining 
in this exalted state continuously. Therefore different 
('Aurad') rosaries and sacred recitations and worship 
have been selected and specified which are concerned 
with the entire body of man. 

A. The stipulated prayers (The 'Namaz'). 

B. Tilawate Qur'an-e-Karim'. The recitation of the 



377 



Holy Qur'an. 

C. Tasbeeh'. Saying the rosary. These reverent 
practices are of immense good to the body and 
the soul to profit as their culmination remains, 
the ('Zikr') rememberance of Allah. 

Under the circumstances, if a person can not 
remain preoccupied in the 'Zikr' of Allah all the time, 
he should at least try to do so predominantly, most of 
the time by word and deed. The thought of the 
hereafter should always prevail over the matters of this 
world. This world is mundane, the next is momentous. 
The Almighty Allah has proclaimed. 

o » : iifcl & } J# tfw x i 
(>r.:*i>) 

And celebrate it during night hours and at 
the ends of the day, that thou mayest be 
pleased. (20:130) 

Allah Almighty has also ordained that:- 

ifuj!il»tf jilt 'jf j ll^t j \'J% &T> j^-i Jo( j 
(TVT© : j»Ji\) O^JjLli^j 

And mention the Name of thy Lord at 
dawn and in the evening, and prostrate 
thyself of Him by night and extol Him 
through the night. (76 : 25,26) 

It is also ordained in the Holy Book. 

v : c4>) o C jji £ ity t>usr 



378 



They would sleep little of the night. 

(51 : 17) 

* 

It is stressed at, in these (Ayats) verses of the Holy 
Qur'an that man should revere and remember Allah a 
lot. It is therefore necessary for this excessive worship 
of Almighty Allah that He should be worshipped day 
and night. 



ROSARIES OF THE DAY 

Five rosaries of the day are given hereunder:- 
The first rosary relates to the time span between very 
early in the morning to the dawn. These rosaries are 
. so ('Ba Barkat') blessed that Allah Almighty has sworn 
by them in the Holy Book. For instance. 

(>A :j0 £jl) O^l'i] jvldij.' 

By the.dawn when it breathes. (81:18) 

0:jM) . . 

Say: I take refuge with the Lord of the 
.daybreak. . (113 . i) 

He breaks the dawn... (6 : 96) 

The elegance of the hour is at the essence in these 
time-stipulated rosaries. Hence to be fully attentive to 
the piety of the ('Nafs') soul is vital during this period. 



379 



The man should say the following, immediately 
on waking up from sleep. 

. jjJUI ul j b" Ul U JiM UU^-I ^JJI aU JuiJl 

"All Praise be to Allah who gave us life 
after that which had caused us to deaden 
and unto His is the Return." 

It is better to adopt the following course on regular 
basis: - 

1. After proper ablutions, clean clothes should be 
worn. 

2. For women proper care about being properly 
clad is necessary, as stipulated by 'Shari'at'. 
(The Islamic code of conduct and 
jurisprudence) . 

3. The dress worn should be simple (Not showy, 
tempting or displaying arrogance of richness) . 

4. Right through these preliminaries including 
going to the toilet (left-foot first), brushing the 
teeth ('Miswak'), the ('Wuzoo') abolutions or 
taking a bath ('The GhusT) and dressing up, the 
overriding intention of starting the prayers 
immediately on their completion, is necessary. 

5. The 'Sunnat' prayers should be said at home. 
The Hcly Prophet {peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) used to do so. 

6. After that the man should go to the mosque 
(Enter right foot first) . 

A. On entering the mosque he should say the 
relevant prayer to this effect, as 



380 



aforementioned. 

B. Thereafter he should try to find place for 
himself in the first row. 

C. If there is time for it, he should say the 
prayers of ('Tahiyatul Masjid') thankfulness 
to Allah for having entered the mosque, the 
Allah's sacred place of worship, m case he 
has not said his ('Fajr') morning prayers' 
('Sunnats') he should perform them. 

D. After that while waiting for tljp fNamaze 
Farz Ba Jam'at') stipulated compulsory 
prayers in congregation, he should be 
saying rosaries extoHing Allah ('Hamd') and 
seeking forgiveness of his sins ('Istaghfar') . 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said "that there is high 
recognition of the merit of a ('Named') 
worshipper remaining in the mosque till day 
break, praying and saying rosary all the while. It 
is dearer to 4 Me' than setting four slaves free." 

E. Four things are very rewarding during this 
period bjetween the completion of ('Namaze 
Fajr') morning prayers and the dawn viz 
general worship and prayers, saying a 
rosary, reciting the Holy Qur'an and 
meditation on the 'Ma'rfat' of Allah. 

The following prayer should be offered first after 
the 'Farz' prayers:- 



381 



u b j b> } O dp! j fOUi j ' f tO cii 

"0 Allah! Send Thy blessings on 
Muhammad and on the Family of 
Muhammad. Allah! Thou art peace and 
from Thee is all peace and toward Thee 
returneth all peace. O our Lord! Keep as 
alive in peace and enter us in the House 
of Peace. Thou art full of all blessings. O 
Mighty and Majestic." 

8. After that it is better to recite those prayers and 
rosaries which have already been specified with 
reference to the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him). If necessary he 
can use a booklet of these prayers and rosaries 
('Dua-e-Masoora': Effective Prayers). 

This blessed hour should be utilised to the 
maximum in (Tasbeeh-o-Talbeeh') in saying 
rasories and praising Allah. Hence, according to 
the availability of time; if not 100 times or 
seventy times each, the following ten 'Ayats' 
and 'Hamd' should be repeated at least 10 
times each to make up a rosary of a hundered. 
They are very effective. 

"There is no god save Allah, the Only, the 
One. There is no partner to Him. For Him 
is all Sovereignty and for Him is all Praise. 



.382 

He gives life and He gives death. He is 
Ever-Living and He never dies. He is 
powerful over all things." 

"There is no god save Allah, ' the 
Sovereign, the True, the Manifest." 

a j 'jfi iiio Jin tfj iij a j k &ji j fa ^ 

"Glory be to Allah; and all praise is for 
Allah; and There is no god save Allah; 
and Allah is Great; and There is no might 
and no power except in Allah." 

" i£*HJ f&l fa '0>*C- 4-Usxj j fa 'ObC 

"Glory to Allah and I begin with His 
Praise; Glory to the Almighty Allah and I 
begin with His Praise." 

"Glorified and Sacred is Our Lord, and 
the Lord of the Angels and the Spirit." 

"I seek forgiveness of Allah who is— there 
is no god save Him, the Ever Living, the 
Ever-Subsisting and I ask Him to accept 
my repentance." 





383 



"O Ever-Living, Ever Subsisting! I seek 
help with Thy Mercy [i.e.. In the court of 
thy Mercy I make my most humble 
petition of my grievance for redressal]. Do 
not leave me to myself for even the 
twinkling of an eye and Thou make my 
affairs good for me." 

. J*Jt ill* ll^Jli 

"0 Allah! There is no one able to ithhold 
that which Thou grantest and There is no 
one able to grant that Thou withholdest 
and the greatness of none else can be of 
any benefit as against Thee." 

- J> J* j **** J* s* ^ 

"O Allah! Send Thy blessings on 

Muhammad and on the Family of 
Muhammad." 

d i Jfr J ^ 11 ^ ri 

"In the name of Allah — who is the One 
that with the invocation of His Name 
nothing can cause any harm in the earth 
and in the heavens, and He is Heaven 
knower." 



You will notice that each one of these ('Kalimats': 
Statements) verses has its own individual taste and 
tempo in a blissful morning. 



384 



9. Then the man should recite the Holy Qur'an. 
But if he can't do so due to shortage of time he 
should at least recite from the ('Qava'riul 
Qur'an') i.e. selected verses and chapters from 
the Holy Book viz. 

A. The 'Ayatul Kursi'. 

B. "Aamanar-Rasoor'i.e. the last two ('Ayat') 
verses of 'Soora-e-Baqara' 

C. 'Shahidallah': The Ayat from 'Soora-e-Ale 
Irnran'. 

D. 'Qulillah Humma Malikul Mulk', the holy 
verse from 'Soora-e-Ale Irnran'. 

E. The man should try and learn the opening 
verses of 'Soora-e-Hadid' and the last 
verses of the 'Soora-e-Hashr' by heart and 
recite them. 

Alternatively, he can adopt reciting the following 
rosaries called the 'Musbaate Ash^ (The ten to be 
repeated seven times each). It is a singular compilation 
of rosaries in prayer as reportedly conveyed by Hazrat 
Khi2»r Alaihas Salam (Allah be pleased with him) to 
Hazrat Ibrahim Taini (Rahmatullah Alaih) for recitation 
at this hour. Each one of them has to be repeated 
seven times «ach. It is a praiseworthy ('Wazeefa') 
combination of prayers. 

(i) 'Soora-e-Fatiha* 

(ii) 'Soora-e-Kafiroon' 

(iii) 'Soora-e-Ikhlas' 



385 

(iv) 'Soora-e-Falq' 

(v) 'Soora-e-Nas' 

(vi) 'Ayatul Kursi' 

(these six are from the Holy Qur'an. The 
remaining four are 'zikr') 

"Glory is to Allah; and all Praise is for 
Allah; and There is no god save Allah; 
and Allah is Great." 

-(•4- 3 'J' J* J* r^r S 

-"0 Allah! Send blessing on Muhammad 
and on the Family of Muhammad." 

"O Allah! Forgive all the believing men 
and all the believing women." 

& ^ a } jit y cji u 3>i3i j glut j 

"O Allah! Forgive me and my parents and 
deal with me and with then promptly and 
deferedly in the world and in the Hereafter 
in the manner befitting Thee and do not 
deal with us O our Master, to which we 
deserve. Verily, Thou art Oft-Forgiving, 
Most Merciful." 



386 

10. An ('Hfcayat') anecdote of extraordinary nature 
is related about these 'Musbaatul Ashr' in the 
sister volume of this work, the 'Ahyaul^Uloom'. 
After finishing these rosaries one should 
meditate on the proximity of death i.e. ponder 
over it to the extent of its nearness to the day, 
leave aside considering it in terms of years, 
months or weeks. In such dedication of heart 
the good of ten years can be achieved in ten 
('Saats') seconds of solemnity of thought. 
Almighty Allah has proclaimed. 

Have they not. looked at the dominion of 
the heavens and the earth and what things 
Allah has created, and that it may be that 
their term has drawn near?.... (7 : 185) 

Such introspection is invaluable. It inculcates the 
spirit of assessment of one's performance vis a 
vis the balance of good deeds done by him and 
errors and evil acts committed by him during 
the day. It gives him food for thought, how to 
overcome his follies and indiscretions on the 
one hand and also to devise ways and means to 
improve his conduct to perform better in future. 
In doing so one also oversees ones general, 
overall status and his present position. It exhorts 
him to excel, make amends for timely and rise 
up to higher values of following viz the dictates 
of Allah. 



387 



A. As a result, he begs pardon of his sins from 
Allah more sincerely and remorsefully. 

B. At the same time he gets spurred to not 
only make up the loss and chart out a 
pattern of noble deeds whose virtuosity may 
cleanse his soul and bring him nearer to 
Allah, but also to make him a more staunch 
and steadfast worshipper. 

C. Then comes the stage when he starts 
counting his blessings, becomes a 'Shakir' 
(A thanks given to Allah) . 

D. In this exercise his adoration of Allah 
increases day by day with the resultant rise 
in status progressively. 

Of course, besides the stipulated prayers of 
'Fajr', 'Namaz' of any kind can not be said from 
early morning to the dawn of the day. 

The second 'Daur', is between the dawn and 
the time of ('chasht') 'Early-day' prayers. If 
possible he should stay a while in the mosque. 

(A) . He can then say the 'Chasht' prayers which 
have been acknowledged as highly 
commendable. According to age old custom 
these prayers comprise four, six or eight 
'Rakaats' of 'Chasht' prayers. 

(B) . After that, if he has time, the man can say 

an other two Rakaats of prayers called the 
'Dagana' (Prayer having two 'Rakaats' or 
prescribed salutations in 'Namaz') . 



388 



12. Then depending on the availability of time he 
should occupy himself in doing individual good 
deeds like:- 

(i) Enquiring after the health and happiness of 
the sick and needy. 

(ii) If so, attending ('Namaze Janaza') the pre- 
burial prayers of a deceased. 

(iii) Perform various jobs for the welfare of the 
community or faith. 

(iv) Call on the 'Ulema' or other elite of the 
('Deen') Faith etc. 

Then comes the duration between ('Chasht') 
early morning after dawn and the ('Zuhr') the noon, 
including part of the afternoon. It can be divided into 
four parts. 

I. A person who has the desire and means to 
acquire ('Ilm') knowledge or is a student should 
spend this time in acquiring education not this 
learning should be in quest of the betterment of 
his ('Akhirat') hereafter or at least it should not 
conflict with it. As a matter of fact such a 
person should straightaway absorb himself in 
such scholarship after the ('Fajr') morning 
prayers. It is also tantamount to ('Ibadat') 
worship. 

If you persue the accompanying volumes of this 
book called 'Ahyaul Uloom' and the 'Jawaharul 
Qur'an' you will be amply enlightened that such 
pursuits set a man on to the right path by giving 
him adequate insight into what is sacred and to 



389 



be adopted and what is cursed and as such to 
be condemned. 

II. The second condition is that in which, somehow 
one is not capable of becoming a scholar of 
some ('Ilm') learning. Hence the more he 
dedicates himself to ('Zikr') the remembrance of 
Allah, in saying rosaries in His praise and in 
other forms of worship within this period, the 
better it is for him. This is the veritable status of 
a ('Abid') virtuous worshippper of Allah. The 
heart and soul of a person of this kind becomes 
perpetually absorbed in the 'Mar'fat' of Allah, 
which is a singlular blessing indeed. 

III. In the third state the man undertakes to 
dedicate himself to the cause of the service of 
humanity, specially by providing selfless aid and 
succour to the faithful and amongst them 
respectfully attending to the elite the 'Soofia', 
'Fuqara' and 'Darveshes' of merit. It is no mean 
accomplishment. At times, it surpasses the 
'Sawab' (The merit bestowed) of saying 'NawafiP 
(The additional prayers - 'Namaz') by thus 
behaving like an 'angel in mercy' for them and 
other Muslims. In it lies his happiness. The 
virtue ts its own reward. 

IV. The fourth state is that of a person who does 
not fall into the above mentioned categories but 
of necessity has to tend to his family instead, by 
earning a livelihood by adopting a trade or 
vocation. 



390 



It is incumbent upon him to take care that:- 

A. The people of the world that they have to 
come in contact with their daily trade wares 
are not hurt by his word or deed. 

B. He should not become money grabbing, 
miserly and avaricious. Rather, contentment 
should be his principal trait in toil or 
trading. The love of Allah should always be 
above the love of the world for him. 

Nitty gritty, any person who may tend to 
deviate from these four courses of conduct 
will be responsible for his own ruin at his 
own hands. 

The time period between ('Zawal') noon and the 
('Asr') evening should be spent as under (if not pre- 
occupied with earning livelihood for self and family) :- 

(i) Having a little nap ('Qailoola') just preceding the 
('Zawal') noon is beneficial like partaking 
('Sehri') of some food before ('Roza') fasting. 
Naturally doing so is inadvisable for a person 
who has no night vigils in prayers and worship 
as Allah does not like the indolent, negligent 
and the lethargic. Such lotus eaters have no 
business to be doing nothing and wasting their 
precious time, like the idle rich of no useful 
pursuit or purpose. 

After this siesta he should hurriedly look after 
his Taharat' bodily cleanliness and presentability and 



391 



should rush to the mosque and hear the ('Azan') call 
for the after noon prayers. > 

(i) Thereafter he should perform ('Namaze 
Tahayatul Masjid'K two ('Rakaats') salutations of 
prayers in token of his having been blessed to 
be in the mosque. 

(ii) The man should then say four prolonged 
'Rakaats' of 'Namaz' as the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) used to do. 

It is stated in the 'Hadith' that a person who 
does so specifically in respectful succession to the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) is 
so rewarded in following in His footsteps that seventy 
thousand angels join him in saying these prayers and 
pray for him till late at night. 

After that he should perform his ('Farz') 
prescribed prayers in congregation with, other faithfuls 
under the leadership of the ('Imam') the prayer-leader,^ 
subsequently, after saying two 'Rakaats' of the 'Sunnat' 
he should either get busy with 'Zikr' or recitation from 
the Holy Qur'an or in other useful deeds for the Faith 
and the Faithful or alternatively again start prosecution 
of the job of earning his livelihood. 

V. Now, for the period between 'Asr' and the 
sunset. 

The man should try and reach the mosque 
before ('Maghrib') evening prayers, after a short 
respite. He should right away get busy in 'Tasbeeho 
Istaghfar' and in saying rosaries of reverence and 



392 

redemption, since the importance of this hour too is 

as desalbed ' ear,lcr - A,,ah A,m *»* 

(ST . 

And celebrate the praise of % Lord 
before rising of the sun and before its 
setting.... {20 . m 

It is advisable to do the following:- 

A. Recite 'Soorah-e-Shams' 

B. 'Soorahe Lail' 

C. 'Soorahe Falaq' 

D. And 'Soorahe Nas* 

E. At sunset, ('Istaghfar') prayers in penance 
should be said. 

In short rather than waste time in erratic 
approach to things, it is better for the man to avail of 

ZJLT n3 ^ ° f 0p P° rtun »V * planning and 
pursuing the purpose of life, as far as possible, unless 
th* person is already fully devoted to Allah and there 

has*: tXlf WaStin * ^ ^ * ^ ^ he 

THE PRAYERS AND WORSHIP AT NIGHT 

It's first portion consists of the time between the 
(Maghrib) evening prayers and the ('Isha') the nioht 
prayers. It is fruitful to remain awake during this 
period. It is written in the 'Hadith Sharif (The 



393 



compilation of the sayings of the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) that to do so 
(after a days fatigue) is commendable. It is also in the 
Holy Book that:- 

( U : i4*Ut) . . . .grUaJl J^A Jk* 
Their sides forsake the beds. (32 : 16) 

Rather, the ideal is that the man should remain 
engrossed in the remembrance of Allah throughout i.e. 
after the ('Maghrib') prayers until the ('Isha') night 
prayers. The elevated saints do so. They consider it at 
par with fasting the whole day. They don't touch their 
meals during this time. 

To do all this and then while away the time 
* aimlessly in • idle talk with others after the 'Vitar' (3 
Rakaats stipulated in 'Isha' prayers) prayers is 
tantamount to demotivation to an anticlimax, after 
such dedicated service. 

Then comes the vital element of rest and 
repose, of sleep. It is true that technically when a 
person is sleeping he is not in a state of worship but it 
too has a decorum and everything without decorum is 
indecent. According to Hadith the propriety of being 
asleep is that:- 

(i) A person should sleep 'Qibla roo' facing the 
'Qibla' 

(ii) In doing so the person sleeping should, by 
habit, tend towards his right at the rime of going 



394 



to sleep, tike one is laid to rest finally in his 
grave facing the 'Qibla'. So why not be in a 
state of preparation for it. Who knows that the 
deep slumbers of sleep which are metaphorically 
akin to the 'grand sleep' may not after all be the 
man's final- state of sleepig for good, in this 
condition? That is why the man of Allah purify 
themselves before going to sleep and leave their 
last will under their pillows before reclining on 
the bed. Indeed they are worthy and venerated 
people. They do strange things. 

A. For instance they lie on hard beds 
disdaining comfortable underlays and 
cushions. 

B. They sleep very little, just enough to meet 
an exigency of nature. They say 'that those 
who remain sleeping remain weeping the 
rest of their lives'. For them to sleep for 
eight hours out of twenty four hours of the 
day and night is to squander away one 
third of one's life. They ask the question 
'Have you even seen a love lorn person 
asleep at night?' 

Before going to sleep, the man should make 
sure that the following things are handy in the 
morning. He should go to sleep with the resolve to get 
up early in the morning for prayers and worship. 

(i) Water and other cleansing agents for bath or 
'Wuzoo'. 

(ii) ('Miswak') the green stick or brush for brushing 
the teeth. 



395 

Before lying down in the bed, the man should 
say the following words. 

"In Thy Name O my Lord I put my side 
and in Thy Name I raise it up." 

At the same time he should recite the following: 
A 'Ayatul Kursi 

B 'Aamanur Rasool'. The last verse of 'Soorae 

Baqara.' 
C 'Soorae Falaq' 
D 'Soorae Nas' 
E 'Soorae Mulk' 

This is inter alia other blessings, to go to sleep in 
a condition of satisfactory piety of body and soul. A 
person who goes to sleep in such status, though 
actually not in a state of visible worship of Allah is so 
blessed that his soul is uplifted to the 'Arsh' (The 
celestial heaven) and he is treated equivalent to a man 
in prayer. 

Now comes a veritable worship, the 'Tahajjud.' 
This is the 'Namaz' of the night. It starts after mid 
night. It is of a lofty stature. It's (Tazeelaf) grand status 
and significance has been fully outlined in the sister- 
volume of this book the 'Ahyaul Uloom.' Hence, 
suffice it to say that a man who says this prayer or 
undertakes worship of Allah at this hour of the night 
when all others be asleep, does so like a dovoted lover 



396 



for his much cherished beloved. Such singular 
deification of Allah is akin to his blessed people, His 
'Valis' and prophets. 

In short, it is in man's interest to keep in mind 



(i) Life is short. It is inestimable. It is not known as 
to when the hour of man's departure from this world 
would come. It can be very soon. It may be the very 
night he may be thinking of going to sleep. So, why 
remain sleeping while still awake or sleeping negligently 
most of the time. 



(ii) As oft-repeated the man's permanence abode is 
the place from where he has come. He is only in 
transit in this life. Despite the stress and strain of this 
journey, it is in -his interest not to languish enroute but 
to hurry his step forword purposefully gaining 
momentary with good merchandise to fetch a good 
price for it, in the Akhirah when he returns to his 
home country where he has to remain perpetually, the 
rest of the time as compared to the temporary stay in 
this world. 



(iii) As such, the man should remain alert, plan his 
duties of worship and faithful service to Allah during all 
hours of the day and night lest God forbid he should 
be taken aback unaware, suddenly and unprepared 
After all, which is better, a perpetual life of eternal 
bless or a merry-go-round of momentary happiness? 



PART -2 

OTHER AFFAIRS OF LIFE: PRINCIPALS AND 
THEIR DECORUM 



Now we come to other important affairs of life 
such as:- 

1. Taking food: Eating and drinking. 

2. The 'Nikah' (marriage). 

3. Trade: Earning livelihood. 

4. 'Talabe Halal' : Fair and honest livelihood. 

5. Proper behaviour 

6. Seclusion in prayers. 

7. Travelling 

8. 'Sama and wajd' 

9. The dictum of 'Amre bil Ma'roofwa Nahi Anil 
Muinkar': Asserting the good and abhoring the 
evil. 

10. The government. 

The life of a good Muslim revolves on the axis 
of 'Ilmo Amal' i.e. on the knowledge of truth about 
things and in dealing with them adequately. The 
savoir-faire viz the faculty of knowing just what to do 
and how to do it, enables a man to do so. After our 
recent discourse on the Ma'raft of Allah and His 
'Ibadat', His worship, which is the ultimate aim of life, 
it is also essential to know the basic principles of 
various important aspects of day to day life to be able 



397 



398 

to lead the life of a good Muslim according to 'Shariat', 
the 'Sunnat' and the dictates of Allah, on each subject. 
Such conduct of affairs has accordingly its own ethical 
value in Faith for every Muslim. For example the very 
act of eating and drinking as a faithful servant of Allah 
has been identified by Allah, as under in the Holy 
Book. 

(0 > : J_pjji) * bJu \'J^\ j jijji # <JSr 

Eat of the good things and do right. 

(23:51) 

In this Holy verse Allah has combined the act of 
eating with doing good deeds to show us the path of 
virtue vi? and also to tell us that nothing is without 
purpose in life. 

* 

A. A person who takes food to attain the boon of 
'Ilm o AmaP for his welfare in this world and in 
the hereafter, automatically gets the reward of 
his noble intentions. Thereby this act of eating 
becomes a preceding part of worship. For the 
some reason the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has also said 
that a Messalman gets 'Swab' for everything he 
does. He is even rewarded for every morsel of 
food that he puts in his mouth or in that of any 
member of his family . " 

B. That is how every good deed, each virtuous 
action is recompensed by Allah. Such rewards 
supplement the Mussalmans 'Akhirat' a lot. Vice 
vesa, it implies that 



399 

(i) The food taken should not be from ('Rizqe 
Haram') illegitimate sources. 

(ii) There should. be no greed or gluttony in it. 
(Hi) That there should be no wastage of food. 

THE DECORUM AND MANNERS OF TAKING 
FOOD 

There are many 'Sunnats' in eating. Some the 
period pertain to 'before eating', some to during eating 
and some to 'after having eaten.' 

A. The following things are 'Masnoon' (According 
to 'Sunnat') . 

(i) To wash hands and face before taking a 
meal. This is like performing 'Wuzzoo' 
abolutions before prayers. Thus the man 
becomes clean and also gets its 'Sawab'. It 
is in the 'Hadith Sharif that a person who 
has the habit of cleaning his hands before 
partaking of food will not face poverty. 

(ii) That befofe eating the food item should be 
placed on a 'Dastarkhawn' (A piece of cloth 
or cover placed on the ground for taking 
meals). Doing so, as if on stop-gap basis. It 
is like a passenger takes his meals in travel. 
It symbolically represents the man being in 
transit in this world. It is also a replica of 
being simple and humble. This is in 
antithesis to the present day custom of 
taking meals on chairs and tables, at times 
with a lot of pageantry. The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 



400 



used to do so. 

(iii) Thirdly, food should not be taken with 
pomp and show by leasurely reclining 
against back-cushions. It should be had 
sitting, preferably in the sedate composure 
of the right leg upstanding, its calf bending 
side ways i.e. in an easy but unpretentious 
manner. 

(iv) Before starting the meal the man should 
resolve 'that I intend to eat to fortify myself 
with strength to perform prayers.' It means 
that in point of proof he should just take 
enough food to be able to do so. Insatible 
in take of food, rich diet and gluttony create 
a bad impression. They are not only 
injurious to health but are also definite 
deterrents to prayers and worship. The 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that "small morsels 
of food, just sufficient to ward off the pangs 
of hunger and keep the back of the person 
erect are enough. If it may not give the 
man contentment then he may do full 
justice to his belly of 'one third with food, 
one third with water and the remaining one 
third of space should lie vacant for him to 
breathe therein." 

(v) The fifth important thing is that the man 
should not go near focxTunless he is really 
hungry. This is one of the principal pre- 
eating 'Sunnats', for the best 'Sunnaf is 
hunger itself. Hence, to eat without appetite 
is not only ('Makrooh') ethically (and 
medically) undesirable but also avaricious. 



401 



On the contrary, a person who withdraws 
his hand a few morsels ahead of a full 
stomach is sensible. He does not need to go 
to a 'Tabic' (A doctor). 

(vi) The betterment, i.e. the Talah' of man 
therefore lies in taking simple food and 
contentment with whatever is ready (Hazir) 
and not in grande defare. There are those 
who eat to live and others who live to eat. 
Luxurious assortment of delicacies, 
sumptuous dishes, much fanfare and 
display of riches do not behave a Muslim. It 
induces to harsh words and is contrary to 
having food to regain vitality for prayers 
and worship as resolved before eating. 
Therefore eating with higher aims is a 
'Sunnat'. It is a virtuous necessity not a 
luxury. It's seemliness and propriety is self 
explanatory. So, if a man is hungry before 
prayers, he may as well take bread and not 
wait for the dish to be ready. He can then 
say his prayers comfortably. 

(vii) It is better not to take meals individually as 
far as possible. It is always better to eat 
together, 

(a) With the family or 

(b) With the. faithful. 

It increases mutual love, bonhomie and 
fraternity. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) used to do 
so. 

HOW TO TAKE FOOD 



(1) Start with right hand. Say 'Bismillah' (i.e. I start 



402 



with the Blessed Name of Allah) with the first 
morsel loudly so that others may also hear you 
and follow you suit. By the third morsel 
complete the 'Bismillah Ar Rahman Ar Rahim.' 
Begin with a dish of salt or saltish and end with 
it, as it is in the 'Hadith Sharif to nip the evil of 
greed in the bud. 

(2) Take small morsels of food, chew them well. 
Unless in a hurry, do not take the second 
morsel until you have swallowed the first one. It 
is not proper to pick at the food. 

(3) Also, do not pick holes with the food, raising' 
objections to the serving food. The Holy ^ 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon * 
him) has warned against raising petty squabbles 
on the meals served. He (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) used to partake of whatever 
was offered, contentedly. 

(4) It is a 'Sunnat' to first partake of whatever is 
lying before you first, before extending your 
hand to other dishes like ('Maiwa')i fruit etc. 
lying at other places on the 'Dastarkhawn'. 

(5) Pick the bread or Threed' (Bread broken and 
moistened in curry: A savoury and yet easily 
disgestable concoction of Arabic origin) from the 
side rather broke it from the middle. There is an 
obvious virtue in the family or the faithful eating 
together. 

(6) Don't use a knife for bread or meat. Eat by 
hand. 

(7) Don't place the food utensils on the bread itself. 

(8) Don't wipe the hands off the bread. 

(9) Pick up the fallen pieces and particles of food 



403 



from below from the 'Dastarkhawn' and eat 
them, un-hesitatingly. There is pride in not 
eating them and 'Ta'zeem' (respect) for food in 
partaking it without any adamance. According 
to the 'Hadith' the Satan likes wastage of 'Rizq', 
the food, to his own extreme satisfaction. 

(10) Don't puff at it. Wait for the food to get cold. 

(11) It is better that eatables like fruit that can be 
counted, are taken in odd numbers, like seven, 
eleven etc. Since Allah is one, as such there is 
consequent virtue in the 'Vitr' (odd: Not even in 
number: Three Rak'ats of Prayers) i.e. things in 
odd numbers. The date seeds and fruit corns 
should not be kept in the same utensil from 
which they are taken out for eating. 

(12) Little water should be taken with meals. Lastly 
the fingers should be sucked clean and then the 
hands washed. 



DRINKING WATER 

1. Keep the glass or pitcher of water in the right 
hand 

2. 'Bismillah Sharif at the time of taking water. 
See that it is not leaking. 

3. Drink water slowly, preferably in three gulps. 
Drinking water standing or recliningly is not 
good. 

4. Make sure that water is clean, without any 
pieces of straws or dust particles in it. 

5. As aforementioned, start with 'Bismillah 
Sharif {Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim. In the 
Name of Allah, the Most Merciful, the Most 



404 



Beneficient) and end with 'Alhamdu Lilian' i.e. 
All praise be to Allah - a statement of thanks 
giving. After that the following should be 
recited. 

bJu 4&>u 'J j Cst- JU#Jt 

"All praise is for Allah who made it sweet 
and pleasant by His Mercy and did not 
make it bitter and unpleasant on account 
of our sins." 

THE 'ADAB' - MANNERS - 'AFTER FINISHING 
EATING 

1. Withdraw your hand before you are full up. 

2. Wipe the eating finger clean with the tongue 
and mouth after eating. 

3. Pick up the fallen particles of food and eat 
them. 

It is in the Hadith that the person who does so:- 

(A) His 'Rizq' (livelihood) is blessed - increased. 

(B) His children will be upright. 

(C) The 'Rizq', the food particles from below will be 
tantamount to the 'Mehr' (Dowery: Gift given to 
the bride at the time of Wedlock) of a 'Hoore 
Ain' (A beautiful maiden of Paradise). 

4. Remove the food particles from the crevises of 
the teeth with a wooden tooth pick. Swallow 
the food particles that remain in the mouth but 



405 



throw away the rest of them that remain stuck 
to the tooth pick. 

5. Clean the plate with the finger. Then wash it. It 
is in the 'Hadith' that a person who cleans the 
plate after having eaten out of it is repaid for it. 
The plate, the utensil prays for him. And the 
man who drinks water out of it after having 
washed it, is remunerated for it equivalent to 
having set a slave free, as 'Sawab'. Recite the 
following after having taken the meal. 

. iili'jiljiud'ji j 

"All Praise is for Allah, who feuded us, 
gave us drink, sufficed us, gave us refuge. 
He is our Leader and Our Master. Say: He 
is Allah." 

6. Subsequently recite 'Soorae Ealafe Quraish'. 

7. Thank Allah for haivng provided you 'Rizqe 
Halal' an honest living i.e. nourishment 
obtained through honest and legitimate means. 

8. Rue and resolve to relent if the earning be 
'suspect' in any way. 

9. Rinse your hands thoroughly with 'Ashnass* - a 
tree leaf which serves as a soap. Or use soap. 
Likewise the mouth, teeth and the throat should 
be thoroughly cleaned. 

TO EAT IN COMPANY 

The above mentioned principles apply to eating 
and drinking for a Muslim, as a general rule but in case 



406 



of taking meal in a company the following additional 
seven points should be kept in mind. 

1) In the presence of a person who is head and 
shoulders above others due to his age, piety or 
'Ilrn', no one should precede him. He should be 
requested to honour them, by starting the meal. 
In his own case, if the host requests him to do 
so, he should not delay the proceedings, as the 
guest of honour. 

2) This foregathering of the faithful should be 
considered a happy augry of their assembly at 
one place. Rather than kept quiet, it is better to 
have this get-together made lively by diverting 
the discourse to the subjects of Deen, parables 
and anecdotes of wisdom of the elite of the 
olden days and take this opportunity to avail of 
the 'Ilm' and expertise of the redeeming of 
those present specially on matters of mutual 
interest. Aimless random talk and frivolous 
dialogue should be avoided. 

3) The man should be good mannerly towards the 
man or men he may be eating without of the 
same plate or utensils. 

A. He should not hurriedly precede them like 
a glutton. 

B. Nor pick the cream of the dish for himself. 

C. Nor for that matter eat fast and more than 
them. 

D. On the contrary, he should courteously 
offer the various dishes to others inviting 
them to partake of them first matter of 
courtesy. However to do so more than 



407 



thrice is to be overformal. 

Habitual hunger in not good. Food should be 
taken normally i.e. neither the meal should be 
consumed by pouncing upon it mercilessly, 
conspicuously nor should the meal be taken far 
too sparingly i.e. eat much less than the normal 
appetite to show off. ('Ria') Hypocrisy is of no 
use. Politeness and piety are of virtue. 
Hazrat Abdullah Bin Mubarak (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) was a highly respected saint. Whereas he 
used to eat rather restrainedly himself he was so 
hospitable and charitable by nature that 
whenever he used to have the 'Fuqara o 
Masakin', the poor and needy at his place he 
used to entertain them lavishly by offering a 
'Dinar' for every date-seed, to the man who ate 
the most. 

The fifth civility consists of keeping ones eyes 
down while eating 'so that he may not appear 
to be counting the nwrsels of others'. He should 
also take care that:- 

A. If others are paying respect to him by 
following him, he should partake of the face 
in such of manner that none of them go 
hungry in following him suit. - f 

B. He should not prolong the proceedings so 
much that they may get bored. 

The sixth etiquette is that the man should have 
decent eating mannerisms. For example it is apt 
to be rather repulsive to do the following. 



408 

A. To wring the hands, specially in the platter. 

B. To allow the grease to ooze out of his finger 
tips. 

C. To allow saliva or pieces of food to drip 
down etc. 

7) If the host provides a 'Hammam' a water tank 
for the purposes of 'after meal abolutions' i.e. cleaning 
of hands and face, it is improper to noisily spit in the 
utensil of drained water. He should gargle quietly and 
decently. Washing ones hand once, properly is enough 
- Lingering over it while others be waiting to take their 
turn, is not good. 

THE IMPORTANCE OF HAVING A MEAL WITH 
THE FRIENDS AND THE FAITHFUL 

It is in the 'Hadith' that there will be no 
reckoning for these things on the Day of Judgement. 

A. Of food-meal taken at the time of Sehri (At the 
time of fasting) . 

B. The 'Iftari', the meal taken to consummate the 
fast. 

C. Of the meal, food taken with pious friends and 
the faithful., A much respected elder used to lay 
down various dishes on the 'Dastarkhawn' for 
his friends and guests for the same purpose. 
Hazrat Ali Karamullah Wajhahu (Allah be 
pleased with him) is stated to have said 'that to 
present one 'Saa" (Small portion) of such a 
meal in the hospitality of a guest is more to me 
than setting a slave free." 



409 



It is in the 'Hadith Sharif that on the Day of 
Judgement the Allah will address the man and say that 
I was hungry once and you did not give me food? The 
man will not be able to help but ask in extreme 
bewilderment as to how could it be that Allah the 
Beneficient, the 'Raziq' of the entire universe should go 
withofct a meal. He will get the answer oh 'Bani Adam' 
- oh descendent of Adam (peace of Allah be upon 
him) your brother was hungry, he asked you 
beseechingly for something to eat but you forsake him. 
Had something to eat but you forsake him. Had you 
rallied round him at that time, it would have been 
tantamount to serving the food. The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) has said 
that a person who entertains his brother Muslim with 
food and water graciously will be kept seven trenches 
away from the fire of Hell. Each trench is five hundred 
mile hours away from the other. He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said:- 

"The best of them is he who offers the 
most food and subsidy to the poor and 
needy." 

THE ETIQUETTE OF ENTERTAINING A FRIEND 

1. The first basic principal is that one should avoid 
going to meet a friend at the hour of a meal, as far as 
possible. To do so purposely is greediness and sinful. 
The food stuff taken by him would be Haram i.e. not 
legitimate. However, by chance if is a person happens 
to reach a friends house at such an hour, he should 



410 



not partake of the meal with him unless he is genuinely 
insistent. A formal and not well meant request should 
be politely declined. 

Of course there is an exception to every rule. In 
antithesis, if a friend be very loving, devoted, sincere 
and intimate, in that case going to his house at the 
breakfast, lunch or dinner hour, even . with the 
intention of joining him in it with full confidence is a 
'Sunnat'. It is said ( that the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) used to do so, without 
hesitation of any kind, even when he was hungry by 
visiting the houses of either Hazrat Abu Bakar Siddiq 
(Allah be pleased with him), Hazrat Umre Farooq 
(Allah be pleased with him), Hazrat Ayub Ansari (Allah 
be pleased with him) or Hazrat Abdul Hasheem Bin 
Altaihan (Allah be pleased with h\m). 

Like, a venerated saint had three hundred and 
sixty friends. All, true embodiment of love and 
devotion for him. He used to spend a day with each 
one of them without any reluctance or misgiving about 
any of them. His host used to get overjoyed at seeing 
him. There is nothing more dependable than true love 
and sincerity. Likewise one of such elite had thirty 
friends. He used to live with them once a month, have 
intimate discourse on matters of faith with them and in 
this courteous intermingling be a source of great 
blessing for each other. Similarly a holyman had seven 
bosom friends. He used to visit them once every week 
with extreme mutual happiness. 

It is related that once the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) visited the house. 



411 



of Hazrat Bareeda but he was not at home. He knew 
that Hazrat Bareeda would be pleased with it. On the 
humble insistence of the inmates of his household he 
stayed to a meal there and became the most reverent 
recepient of the gratitude of Hazrat Bareeda, when he 
came to know of it. Similarly, Hazrat Muhammad Bin 
Wasif (Rahmatullah Alaih) was a much esteemed 
holyman of the days of Khawja Hassan Basari 
(Rahmatullah Alaih). He used to go to Hazrat Hassan 
Basari frequently and share his meal with him without 
any reservation, enjoying whatever used to be available 
at that time. 

It is said that once Hazrat Hasan Basari 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) was not at home, when a group 
of estimable people of honour come to pay their 
respects to him. Nevertheless they were detained and 
hospitably treated. When he came home he was 
touched and delighted at their presence in his humble 
abode and was also glad that they had condescended 
to stay back at his place and take some rest and repast 
there. He said so to them, adding that the 'Buzurg', 
the reverend of the olden days used to do so. They 
were informal and invaluable in their own right. 

II. The second behaviour of grace is that if an 
intimate or respectable person calls on him, he should 
not hesitate the least in serving him with whatever 
meagre on material food is available at home. Standing 
to formality of a fictitious nature would do him no 
good. He can make up for all deficiencies by his 
genuine reception, sincere love and respect for his 
guest and with the saving grace of presenting himself in 
his true status quo, without having obtaining a loan for 



412 



eating to his guests comforts. He has to look after his 
guest as well as his family. To all intents and purposes, 
the responsibility to feed his family and children may 
be more over-weighing. A friend of Hazrat Ali 
Karamullah Wajhahu (Allah be pleased with him) 
invited him to a meal at his place. He laid down the 
folowing conditions before accepting his hospitality. 

A. That he will not bring any thing from the 
bazar. 

B. That he would be contented with whatever 
is available normally at home 

C. That the members of his household will 
have a preference over him. 

Hazrat Fazeel (Rahmatullah Alaih) an esteemed 
person of those days used to say that the sympathy, 
good natured friendship and its warmth of feeling 
decreases due to Takullufat* - uncalled for formality. 
No such thing exists amongst friends. Even otherwise, 
a warm welcome, loving treatment of the guest and 
the genuine happiness felt by the household for him is 
far more than lavish dishes of assorted nature prepared 
for him under compulsion of any kind. Once a friend 
stood to formality for a 'Buzurg' - a respected elder. 
He spoke to the host politely and said "My Son, 
neither you take such food normally. Nor do I. So 
why the observance of this formality amongst friends. 
So you had better stop it pr I will have to stop coming 
here." 

Hazrat Salman Farsi (Allah be pleased with him) has 
also said that the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) used to repeatedly advise people 



413 



to present 'Ma Hazar' i.e. whatever is readily available 
at home, at that time to the unannounced guest and 
not to be formal. As a matter of fact He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) used to do so and 
entertain His Sahaba (Allah be pleased with them) with 
pieces of bread and dry dates unhesitatingly and used 
to say that anyone who feels shy to do so, should 
correct himself." 

This puts the stamp on it. Similarly it does not 
behave a guest to look askance at it, specially if the 
meal on the spur of the moment may be meagre. It is 
sinful to do so. 

In the same way, Hazrat Younus Alaih-as- 
Salam (peace of Allah be upon him) also used to 
entertain his guests, some of them used to be very 
eminent, with pieces of bread and vegetables grown in 
his own' little orchard. He used to say "That if Allah 
had not condemned the people who stand to 
formalities with their guests, I would parhaps also have 
done so." 

In any case, it is the civility behind the service 
and not the ceremony, it is the attitude of genuine 
welcome and not the extravagance that counts. In final 
analysis, those hosts are really deplorable who are 
carefree having the form but not the spirit. 

There are lasting lessons in these practical 
demonstrations of what was preached. We should 
learn a lot from them. It is also related that a group of 
people went to the house of Prophet Zakaria Alaihas 
Salam (peace of Allah be upon him) as they had a 



414 



feud to settle and wanted Hazrat Zakarya (the Prophet) 
to intervene. However he was not at home but a 
beautiful lady present there informed them that Hazrat 
Zakarya had gone out to work. He was a labourer. 
The woman was very charming. The doubts and 
misgivings thus created in their hearts were further 
aggravated when they saw him taking meal. He talked 
to them but did not ask them to join him. Finally what 
surprised them the most was that when he got up from 
there they saw that he was without shoes. Hence, they 
could not restrain themselves from requesting him to 
satisfy their curiosity on all the three counts. He 
sedately replied. 

(1) The attractive lady that you saw alone in my 
house, is my wife. She saves me from 
committing a sin. 

(2) I did not ask you to join me, as I am a 
labourer. If I had eaten less, I would not have 
been able to perform my duty (earn 'Rizqe 
Halal) for which I am paid. 

(3) As for my being bare-footed, I am not wearing 
my shoes as I do not want them to carry the 
dust of this, place else where as there is a 
dispute of some kind between the owners of this 
land. 

There was a befitting lesson for the disputants in 
the prophets answer to them. It also teaches us to be 
fair and square in ones dealings with others; false 
vanity, standing to ceremony, overdoing things beyond 
one's means and treacherous pomp and show never 
pay. 



415 



III. The third becoming behaviour is in avoiding to 
put the host to inconvenience as for as possible 
if his means be straitened. Rather than embarass 
him in any way it is better not to visit him, if it 
can be helped. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) was very 
considerate in such matters. 

Once a person paid a visit to Hazrat Salman's 
place (peace of Allah be upon him) when he was in a 
much impoverished stab. All that he could do to serve 
the guest was to lay down barley bread and some salt 
before him. However in his naivety, the guest 
insensibly remarked that if this salt had a little 'Sa'ala' 
(A kind of flovoured leaf) with it, it would have been 
more delicious. Consequently Hazrat Salman 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) had to mortgage his 'Aftaba' (A 
metal service utensil) for a paltry sum to please his 
guest. 

However, after having partaken of the meal the 
guest raised his hands aloft and ironically prayed as 
under: 

"All Praise is for Allah who granted us 
contentment on the 'Rizq' provided to us." 

Hazrat Salman (Rahmatullah Alaih) was taken 
aback at this strange thanks giving by his worthy guest 
and remarked. "Had you been a contented person my 
'Aftaba' would not have been mortgaged." 



416 

• 

If a pious, well to do host having genuine love 
of his fellow brothers of faith extends an ipvitation to 
them with warm personal regards to come and have a 
meal with him to please him, the thing becomes 
different altogether, there is no inconvenience 
involved. 

It is related that once Hazrat Imam Shafai 
(Rahamatullah Alaih) was staying with his friend 
Zafarani. The host held Imam Shafai (Rahamatullah 
Alaih) in such light esteem that during his stay with 
him he was overjoyed at his good fortune and honour 
that Imam Shafai (Rahmatullah Alaih) had 
condescended to stay at his place in Baghdad. Every 
morning he used to give a list of items of food that he 
wanted prepared for his honourable guest, to the 
cook. One day Imam Shafai made a change in the list 
and added an item to it. When Zafrani saw this piece 
of paper with the inscription of Imam Shafai 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) on it, he was so overwhelmed 
with delight that in his ecstasy he set the slave girl free, 
instantaneously. 

IV. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has also praised that a high 
person is he whose principal motto in life should 
be to give happiness to others, by being active 
in/whole heartedlyfulfilling the cherished desires 
of his friends and the faithful and has foretold 
that:- 

A. He will be awarded blessings equivalent to 
thousands of 'Naikis', good deeds, 
commensurate with his conduct. 



417 



B. An equal number of sins committed by him 
would be forgiven. 

C. If he continues doing so unremittingly, he 
would ultimately be sent to 'Jannatul 
Firdous', 'Jannatul Adam' or to 'Khuld' 
(Three Status of Paradise), as the case may 
be. 

If a person of such temperament is well to do, 
has no 'Ria* in him and invites his friends and brothers 
in Faith to dine with him, even going to the extent of 
asking each one of them of his favourite dish, there is 
no harm in responding to him with reciprocal love, so 
that his feelings are not hurt. 

Nevertheless, come what may, it is the moral 
duty of the guest to keep the regard and respect for his 
host the foremost in his heart by partaking of the ('Ma 
hazar') i.e. what ever is ready in the house, as if it is a 
'Khawn-e-Ne'mat' (The most cherished food), even if it 
be a humble meal. 

'FAZEELATE MEZBANF (BLESSEDNESS OF 
BEING THE HOST) 

There is mucftlMsdom in the age old saying of 
the sages that "do'nt be formal if a guest comes to 
your place willy nilly but spare nothing when you invite 
somebody for 'Da'wat' (a repast) yourself." 

As already discussed, in the first case the host is 
not prepared and as such he is likely to be 
inconvenienced or liable to be embarassed if he is in 
straitened circumstances. But in the second case, the 
status is clearly different. He has the 'Fazeelat' i.e. the 



418 



blessedness of being the host, the 'Mezban' and it is a 
matter of pleasure for him to honour others and call 
them to a repast at his place. He happily makes 
preparations for it which pleases Allah and is also a 
source of strengthening the ties of fraternity between 
the friends and the faithful. So much so that the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has said that an unhospitable person is unfortunate as 
he remains away from many rewards due to his bad 
disposition. 

His uncharitable act of being unhospitable to a 
guest is like being harmful to him and a person who is 
hostile to his guest is tantamount to being aggressive to 
Allah. Consequently he invites Allah's wrath due to his 
bad temperament. 

According to a school of thought, it is in order 
to entertain a poor guest with formal decorum even if 
the host has to take a loan himself, for this purpose, so 
that the sensitive piety of the poverty stricken guest is 
not impaired. 

In this context it is stated by Hazrat Abu Rafih 
(Allah be pleased with him) the servant of the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings oi Allah be upon him) 
"that one day the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) asked me to go to a certain 
person (A 'Yahoodi': A Jew) and bring some flour 
from him to be repaid In the month of 'Rajab' as 
wanted to entertain a guest." According to Hazrat 
Rafih (Allah be pleased with him) the Yahoodi 
declined to give the flour without a covering security. 
Thereupon the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 



419 



Allah be upon him) is said to have given him a piece 
of his armour in'lieu and uttered, "Allah is a witness to 
it that I 'am the 'Ameen* (The most worthy of trust and 
custody) in the Heavens and the Earth. Had he given 
the flour it would have been adequately 
recompensed." 

Hazrat Ibrahim AlaihisSalam (peace of Allah be 
upon him) used to go looking for a guest, for a couple 
of miles sometimes, so that he could have the privilege 
of taking his meal with him. It is stated that at times he 
used to go without it himself, if he could not find 
someone to dine with him. 

The customary legend of hospitality is still alive 
in the Holy city of 'Makkha Mukarama'. There are 
wellknown villages in its precincts which are famous for 
it and some times hundreds of such guests of honour 
are seen partaking of their nightly dinner there. 

INVITATION TO A REPAST AND PRINCIPLES 
OF ACCEPTING IT. 

In general principles only the virtuous and pious 
person should be invited to such a repast. The food 
strengthens its consumer. Hence, asking an evil doer 
to it is equivalent to invigorating an ignoble person in 
his irreverent vulgarity. 

Secondly, the host should make sure that the 
'Fuqara' the poor people are invited to it. The Holy 

Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
once conveyed His disapproval of a 'Valima' (Post- 
marriage feast) where only the rich persons were 



420 



invited. He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
further remarked "that you tend to commit a folly even 
in a gathering of good men. Ironically, you extend the 
invitation to such people who are more likely not to 
attend it and ignore those who are really deserving and 
would have happily responded to your call." 

Thirdly, the following important considerations 
should be kept in mind at the time of inviting people. 

A. The near and dear ones and relatives must be 
invited. Although inadvertent, their omission is 
likely to hurt their feelings. 

B. The intention of having such a gathering to a 
meal should be the fulfilment of a 'Sunnat* not 
showing off or pretentious display of wealth and 
luxury. 

C. As aforementioned, it is the 'Maskeen and 
Fuqara' i.e. the poor and down trodden whose 
happiness should be the first consideration. Vice 
versa, such a person should not called who may 
be ill disposed to respond to this gesture of 
goodwill due to continual selfishness. Such 
people are better avoided. 

The following broad principles should govern 
the acceptance of such an invitation. 

I. There should be no disparity between the rich 
and the poor as the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) used to accept 
the invitation of the poor, most happily. It is 
related that once Hazrat Hassan Basari (Allah be 
pleased with him) happened to pass by a group 



421 



of destitute people who were eating small pieces 
of bread. They beckoned to him respectfully 
and said "Oh, exalted descendant of Holy 
ancestry do us the favour to join us in our 
humble meal." He was touched, dismounted 
from his horse and joined them pleasantly. 
Later he remarked that Allah does not like 
haughty persons. Before departing from them, 
he requested them most amiably to have lunch 
with him, which they accepted heartily. 

The next day he made sure to supervise things 
personally and have several delicious dishes 
prepared in their honour. He joined them in the 
meal which they liked and felt very happy at 
their joy. 

II. If the recepient of an invitation has the least 
doubt that the host will later ascribe it as a 
favour done to him, he should decline the offer 
discreetly. For, actually it is the host who should 
feel grateful, not the guest. 

He should also not accept the invitation of the 
host prudently if he has any misgivings on the 
following grounds :- 

(i) That the meal offered by the host is 'suspect' in 
any way. 

(ii) That the atmosphere in the gathering for the 
repast will not be befitting, or according to the 
Faith; for example the floor would be carpetted 
with richly inlaid carpets, or the stove is used 
would be of silver casing, or the pictures of 
animals and other menagerie would be painted 



422 



on the walls or there would also be a gorgeous 
music and pantomime show or for that matter 
there would be a lax atmosphere of frolicsome 
nature with other ostentations of the wealth and 
boastfulness of the host. The guest would be 
justified in returning home if he finds such 
goings on in the process, when he reaches 
there. In case, however, if the guest goes to the 
place and finds such things in the offing these, 
he would be perfectly justified to leave the 
premises, immediately. 

(iii) Thirdly, as far as possible, the guest should not 
decline to accept the hosts request because the 
place is far away. He should walk or travel as 
far as he can, for it is written in the 'Torah' (The 
'Torait'): The Holy Book ordained on Prophet 
Moses (peace of Allah be upon him) that one 
should not hesitate to walk a mile to enquire 
after the welfare of a sick person, two miles with 
a funeral, three miles for the sake of a guest 
and four miles to meet a brother in Faith. 

(iv) Also, such an invitation should not be rejected 
due to ('Roza') fasting. On the contrary the 
person invited should make it a point to go and 
join them. He can do so and be contented with 
putting a perfume on and participate in good 
dialogue with a flourish. But if the host is 
dejected and insists it would be noble gesture on 
his part if he breaks his fast and partakes of the 
meal to please his host. 

Surely, to be a source of happiness to the heart 
of a Muslim is superior to optional fasting. It is 
stated that once a similar situation arose and the 



423 



Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) said "Your brother Muslim, your 
worthy host is so aggrieved for you. See how 
much he loves you. Why do'nt you break your 
fast and make him happy?" 
(v) The fifth disciple is that an invitation to such a 
repast should not be accepted to cater for the 
habitual greed for excessive intake of food. 
Such voracity is the trait of animals. The best 
'Sawab', the real achievement lies in the guest 
thinking that if he declines the offer of a brother 
Muslim for petty reasons, he will lie accountable 
to Allah and His Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him), in default. 

A certain ^school of thought is of the opinion 
that the more consideration and respect the guest has 
for the fine sentiments and good wishes of the host for 
him, the more he will benefit from such an acceptance 
of the invitation to the reception made to him. It is in 
the 'Hadith' that the more the respect in the heart of a 
Muslim for a brother Muslim, the more the Almighty 
Allah will be pleased with him. Hence in accepting the 
' invitatiion of his brother in Faith, the 'Niyyat' i.e. the 
good intention is of the essence, like resolving to avail 
of this opportunity to pay his regards and respects to 
his host and also benefit from the pleasure of meeting 
other faithfuls in fraternity. It is a worthy thought worth 
the salt of a true Muslim. 

His acceptance of the offer on such noble 
motives would also forestall the possibility of a brother 
Muslim inadvertently resorting to his 'Gheebat' (Back 
Biting) by wrongly thinking that 'he has not comedo 



424 



this gathering because he is too proud to join us'. 

Thus, there is a distinct merit ('Sawab') in each 
one of these guiding principles, based on the ('Niyyat 
bilkhair') good intention contained in them. That is 
why the praise worthy conduct of the 'Buzurgane 
Deen' i.e. the elite of the Faith is always based on such 
elevated thoughts in conformity with the faith so that 
they do not waste a single breath of their life, as far as 
they can keep it. 

THE ATTENDANCE 

1. Do not keep the host waiting. 

2. Do not idle about to find a good place to sit. 
Or, be seated where the host makes you sit. 

3. Be polite and courteous if otherj want you to sit 
at a position of honour. 

4. Remain away, eyes deterred from the ladies 
enclosure. 

5. Enquire after the health and welfare of the 
person sitting next to you, on being seated. 

5. Refrain from doing or participating in anything 
which is not according to 'Sharah' (The Islamic 
discipline). If the thing gets beyond you, leave 
the place but do not indulge in anything 
objectionable. 

1. If the guest has to stay the night, the host 
should inform him of the correct direction of the 
'Qibla' (The House of Allah in 'Makkah-€- 
Mukarrama') for prayers, and the toilet. 

\. Do'nt linger over the food. Give preference to 



425 

the ('Fuqara-o-Masakeen') poor. Consider the 
host's pleasure to be the most redeeming factor. 

9. Don't eat like a glutton. 

The considerations of hurrying things up are 
cogent to the convenience of the host from the guests 
point of view, not othewise. The Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) has said that huff 
and hurry are the traits of the Satan but there are five 
things in which one should make haste. 

A. In offering food to the guest. 

B. The burial rites of the dead. 

C. 'Nikah' (The marriage) . 

D. Repaying the debt. 

E. Asking forgiveness of sins. 

It is also a 'Sunnat' to not to delay the 'Davate 
Valima' (The Post-marital party) . 

It is better to serve the fruit first. At the same 
time the salad, green vegetables and curry should be 
adequately served on the 'Dastarkhawn'. It is in the 
'Hadith' that the angels descend delightfully when 
green things are assorted on a 'Dastarkhawn' (A piece 
of cloth spread on the ground to take food) . 

Good food, tasty dishes should be decently 
arranged, as soon as possible but rich, heavy, hot 
items should be avoided despite the preference of 
some gluttons for them. 

The food items should be sufficient but the 
'Dastarkhawn' should neither be overloaded by them to 



426 



forestall showiness, nor be so sparse that it may look 
miserly. The idea should be to provide ample food 
amiably to the guests without wastage. In any case if 
still some food is left over, there is no harm in it as 
there will be no final accountability for it. Allah the 
Merciful is All seeing, All knowing! 

According to a parable Hazrat Ibrahim Adhan 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) invited some friends to his place 
and placed many dishes before them. Hazrat Sufyan 
Sauri (A venerated saint) saw this and said "Ae'rnt you 
afraid of wastage?" Hazrat Ibrahim Adham 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) replied, "I might have overdone a 
bit in my anxiety to entertain my guests but I am sure 
that there is no ('Hisab') accountability for it. In any 
case I have already taken care to make sure that my 
children do not see the food served before the guests 
in order that they may not .keep eyeing the 
'Dasterkhawn' or think ill of the guests if no food is left 
for them." However, it is not proper for the guests to 
carry food with them after having eaten it, as some 
'Asfia' (Plural of Soofi: The staunch faithful) tend to do 
on terms of intimacy, seeing that a lot of food is 
available. Nevertheless care should be taken to not to 
do so unless the host insists on it. 

SEEING OFF THE GUESTS 

After* the meal the host should see off his 

guests. 

(i) The guest should seek the host's permission to 
depart. 

(ii) The host should pleasantly go up to the exit 



427 



door to see his guests off. The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
used to do so. 
(Hi) The host should be hospitality personified right 
to the end and should beg pardon of the guest 
if there is anything wanting. Likewise the guest 
should be gracious ingnoring it altogether, 
concealing it and conveying his profound thanks 
to his host for his hospitality. This is what Allah 
likes and rewards his faithful servants for. 

According to an anecdote, a person invited his 
friends to dinner. It so happened that his son invited 
Hazrat Junaid (Rahmatullah Alaih) on his own without 
his father knowledge and permission. When Hazrat 
Junaid reached his door steps the host showed 
hesitation in letting him in. So Hazrat Junaid 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) returned home but when the son 
came to know of it, he again rushed to Hazrat Junaid 
(Rahmatullah Alaih). He again came to their housev 
This time also the father was adamant to invite him in. 
It is related that this happened four times. Hazrat 
Junaid was an eminent saint. When the father came to 
know that despite his age, the stature and the 
inconvenience involved Hazrat Junaid did so only to 
please his son, he was overwhelmed with admiration 
for him, begged his humblest pardon and treated him 
as the guest of honour. Hazrat Junaid did not consider 
it infra dig or inconvenient in the least as the happiness 
of the ardent child was his principal motto. The rest he 
has attributed to the Will of Allah. 

THE 'NIKAH': THE HOLY MARRIAGE 

Like having one's food 'Nikah' is also one of the 



428 



matters of ('Deen') Faith. Just as food is an essential 
requirement of man to exist in life, in the same 
manner the fulfilment of the urges of one sex for the 
opposite sex are necessary according to natural forces, 
specified by 'Nikah' also for posterity. In other words 
whereas 4 Nikah' is the cause of creationary elements of 
man, the food is the source of existence of man. 
Hence such marital union has been permitted by Allah. 
Its purpose is to protect the person against licentious 
behaviour. It is inevitable for procreation and longevity 
of human race in the path of Allah to revere Him. 
Allah has according proclaimed. 



(• 1 : C,>) C#£j ti\ ^JJi j ^ cik u j 

I have not created jinn and men but to 
serve Me. (51 . 55) 

The more the men, the more the human descendents 
the more will be the people to worship Allah, the 
Supreme Creator and the Greater the 'Ummah' 
(Followers) of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him). He (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) has also advised people to perform 
'Nikah' so that on the Day of Judgement he may be 
proud of his 'Ummah' as compared to other prophets. 

Naturally, a person who wants to have more 
children so that there may be more people in his 
family to worship Allah, will be rewarded by Him 
accordingly. This is all the moreso as, one's parents 
and teachers have great right on one. The man comes 
into being on account of his parents. Then they take 



429 



loving care of him while the 'Ustad', the teacher shows 
him the path of the Faith. For this reason people of a 
school of thought are of the view that Nikah is a 'Nafli 
Ibadat' i.e. it is better than 'voluntary worship'. Hence 
now that it has been established that 'Nikah' is a part of 
the affairs of ('Deen') the Faith, it is essential to 
scrutinise the matter in depth, as follows. 

VIRTUES OF 'NIKAH' (THE MARRIAGE) 

The benefits of performing 'Nikah' are contained 
in its five principal merits. 

I. The first benefit is children. One gets four kinds 
of 'Swab' for it. 

(i) The first 'Sawab' (the reward: the gift of a 
good deed) is the children, the continuance 
and growth of human race. Allah likes it. 
We can understand it by the thesis of land. 

A. Allah has made land productive 

B. Taught man to till land with its bullocks and 
other implements to produce the harvest. 
The man can achieve from it, without the 
Almighty Allah having said so, in so many 
words that He wants man to remain 
preoccupied in it, work hard and be blessed 
with plentiful produce. 

Likewise the Supreme Creator has endowed the 
human person with the following. 

A. The womb in woman 



430 



B. The seed of fertility in the rear of man and the 
breasts of women with cogenerating implements 
in both sexes 

C. Awarded mutual urge in them for each other 

Allah is not without meaning. Allah has not 
produced anything without purpose i.e. its motive is 
obvious that both sexes should intermingle legitimately 
and be conducive in advancing human race and not 
act against natural affinity specifically vested in them to 
this effect. Hence it is tantamount to cancelling the 
Allah's will to refrain from 'Nikah'. So much so that 
'Sahabae Kiram' used to consider it 'Makrooh' 
(Undesirable) for a person to die unmarried. It is 
related that two wives of Hazrat Ma'az (Allah be 
pleased with him) died of plague. When he was dying 
of this sickness himself he said that I would not like to 
die like this. I wish I -could get married before breathing 
my last, lest people should say that he has died 
without 'Nikah'. 

The Second 'Sawab' lies in the feeling of pride 
to belong to the 'Ummah' of the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) and desire its 
increase. For this reason the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has disapproved of 
marrying a woman who is 'Banjh' i.e. incapable of 
giving birth to a child. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said that "a date- 
mat in the house is better than such a nulliparous wife. 
An unattractive woman capable of gjving birth to a 
child is superior to an attractive woman who is unable 
to do so." So, obviously the purpose of matrimony is 
not to satisfy the carnal desires. 



431 



The third 'Sawab' of 'Nikah' lies in the perpetual 
'Dua' i.e. prayers and good wishes to Allah that the 
parents get from their children, even after their demise. 
It is in 'Hadith Sharif that such 'Duas' are translucently 
decorated in beautiful chests and shown to the dead. It 
gives them great solace when they see them. 

The fourth 'Sawab' is that Allah forbid if the son 
dies before his parents, whereas it is a serious tragedy 
in their life, he intercedes on behalf of his parents on 
the Day of Judgement. It is in the 'Hadith Sharif that 
"when the son is asked to enter the Paradise, he starts 
clamouring before Allah, seeking His Mercy and 
insisting that I will not go to Paradise unless my parents 
also go there." The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) demonstrated this by pulling the 
side skirt of a man and said that "just as I am pulling 
you towards me, the son will pull his parents to 
('Jannat') Paradise like this, on the Day of Judgement 
in the same manner." It is also in the 'Hadith Sharif 
that the children will be around the gates of Paradise 
crying and clamouringly looking for their parents till 
they find them and take them to Paradise with them. 

There is a Hikayat to this effect that a 'Buzurg', 
a sacred person who was rather adamant to marry, 
once dreamt that the Day of Judgement is manifest. 
He saw that some children carried gold and silver casks 
with them full of glittering water. He saw them giving 
water to the thirsty. He also asked them to give him 
some water but they declined to do so. Each one of 
them said you are not my father. As soon as he woke 
up from sleep, the first thing he did was to perform 
'Nikah'. 



432 



The second advantage of matrimony, the 
'Nikah' is that it serves as a protective castle-wall of 
sanguine security for man against licentuousness, which 
is the armour in chief of the Satan to devastate him. 
Hence, such a married man remains in the Sanctuary 
of marital happiness after 'Nikah' and his 'Deen', his 
Faith is saved from all disasters. 

This is despite the fact that some people may be 
able to overcome sex urges but the natural urge, the 
libido and its manifestations are there and they can be 
very menacing. Hence the very essence of the sex 
urge intrinsically created by Allah in the man and the 
woman is for them to respond to them in civilised 
bonds of 'Sharah' (The Islamic discipline) i.e. 
matrimony, be satisfied and fulfilled beings and attain 
many benefits. 

(i) Of having children 

(ii) Be saved from lascivious conduct 

(iii) Please Allah in bowing down in obedience to 
Him 

(iv) Besides many other advantages as 
aforementioned 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has also said that "there is a 'Shaitan' 
i.e. a Satan with every woman for a man. Hence 
when a man is strongly tempted he should go home 
and conjugate with his wife, for, in this factum all 
women are equal." 

The third benefit is that after 'Nikah* the man 
. finds a singular solace and pleasure in the company of 



433 

his wife. It's soothig effect renew the desire to worship 
Allah since such dedicated service is apt to make bnl 
rather sad ^nd gloomy*. Jtfazrat AH Kiramul. .Wajaha 
(Allah be pleased with iRimf has'aptly remarked 5 "Don't 
snatch a^afe, aEi comfort and cheerfulness from the 
heart suddenly lest without it's brightnes it should go 
blind." 'MMiWeS'wheRMhe McftyirProplteto^eicc and 
blessingg^f AJah |>e m>$n hjm), usee? to-jb^pyt to the 
stress and strain of the 'Mukashafa' (Divine Revelation) 
he used to say to his wortnV i wM : Ha^a^ 1 Als^ (Allah 
be, pleased with her). 



"Aisha! Speak to me" 1 * ' 



nott&nU 



It used* Jo ^ .a source .qf.jnvrisct^tlq^, {(oj^irri, Jpjeac« 
and b^sJnj^^AtJftlb^e uooji him)/tO)jbeW tNrNt&p 
'Wahi' (The Divine Revelation: Instrucftqf() >5 , sH s.bho<.v 

UkfiwJs^; M 4P^a^CianCbJes>ii^5v©f Allah be 
upon him) used to say to Hazrat Bilal (Allah be 
pleased -fadtHihbn)r:rv![ A fibufilq-jf? tertf sugnot A" 



' .OonTCv 'ft&rrroM 1 6 box hr>sn oniv.'O 

"Pl«ase«MiS(3iSlaH" ocxinrA/be riru<o) sri'T 

Thereafter he rfpeace and' bless^nglp' of Allah ?betupdn 
him) used toafagahi ;iqgi*s lengrossed 3n?' prayer • and 
worship with Renewed vigour and devottoft. At.ticnes 
he (peace and.^blesdfogt ( jailAto'ibc»-%6h him) ;used to 
wear a perfume t® divekt-the stoaJii. thehMolyb Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be ' iipori him) lasted' to 
i'A <,'jffeii>v7 of skfc ad ion hits gnivti 



434 



say: 

"I Ukc three things of your world; the 
perfume, my wife and 'Namaz' the 
soothing solace of my eyes." 

The singling out of the 'Namaz' here signifies the 
redeeming soothing virtue of the sweet smelling scent 
and the woman to fortify man to be able to say his 
'Namaz' and worship Allah and thereby get the 
illumination of the eyes which depend upon prayers^ 
Once Hazrat Umar (Allah be pleased with him) asked 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon hirn* as to what one should adopt after the 
world? He replied: 



"A tongue that applauds Allah, a thanks 
giving heart and a 'Momen' woman." 

The fourth advantage is that a woman is a 
faithful, friendly and sacrificing* person. She also 
ette^-^toi^Arftmdi^^ihliitts^- independently in the 
home, including many household chores like cooking 
meBb,'^^ashtti8^ cbtllMS » dusting and cleaning of the 
premises etc. M *he snanMoes these things, he will 
remairr ddvoidv bt 'Hm-o-Amat and 'Jbadaf i.e. he 
would neither be . able to acquire knowledge, earn his 
living and nor be able to worship Allah the way he 



435 



wonts to do them. As such, a woman rises to the 
status of an ally of the first order in the way of Allah. 

Hazrat Abu Sulaiman Dorani (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) has very astutely observed that a good woman, 
a pious wife is a blessing in disguise by keeping her 
hubby away from so many worldly chores and cares 
that actually she Is more related to the affairs of the 
hereafter than this world. Similarly Hazrat Umar (Allah 
be pleased with him) has also observed that "after the 
boon of 'even' (Unflinching Faith) there is no better 
souvenir for a man than a good woman." 

The fifth advantage lies in the achievement of 
man to be able to cope up with the following. It Is a 
very difficult thing and a challenging job. Hence a man 
who comes out of them with flying colours has a 
feaither in his cap. To be able to do so is also ('Ibadat') 
faithful service of great merit. 

1) Patience with women 

2) To cater for their requirements 

3) To keep them harnessed in the affairs of the 
CDeen') Faith. 

For, it is in the 'Hadith' that to provide 'Nafqa' 
(Requirements of life and livelihood) to a woman has 
at times greater worth than giving charity. According to 
'Ahlullah' (The men of Allah: Reverend saints) to be 
able to earn the 'Nano Nafqa* (Livelihood) for ones 
wife and children is worthy of an CAbdaT) esteemed 
saint. It is also related that once Hazrat Ibnul Mubarak 
(Rahmatullah Alaih), venerated 'Wali' was occupied in 



436 



'Jehad' in the battlefield. People were impressed by his 
spirit and performance and asked, "Is anything better 
than Jehad?" He replied, "I think that* if a person has a 
family and children and he brings them up properly 
with tender care; keeps a night vigil that in cold winter 
nights that his children are warm and cosy, forbears his 
own comfort and keeps on covering his children by 
stretching the blanket over tham from time to time, is 
superior to a 'Mujahid'. 

Once Hazrat Bashar Hafi (Rahmatullah Alaih) is 
reported to have said that Imam Hunbal (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) has three -remarkable qualities which I do not 
possess. The principal one of these is that he earns a 
hard living for himself and his family, while I do it only 
for myself. * 

There is a 'Hikayat'. According to this parable 
after the wife of a *Buzurg\ a saint died he was 
reluctant to remarry, despite the repeated exhortations 
of his friends. One night he saw in the dream that the 
doors of the sky are open arid out of them impressive 
people are pouring forth. He went and stood near 
them. One of them saw him and remarked that he is 
the same miserly person ('Bakheel'). The second 
person agreed with it. So did the third and fourth. He 

, got alarmed. Then a child passed by. He enquired of 
the child. The child replied that they had called you 
•Bakheel'. Because, since a week your ('Aamale 
Fakhira') notable good deeds are not being brought up 

* to the heavens with those of the eminent 'Mujahideen'. 
He immediately understood Its import. Got alarmed 
and remarried to be able to in the group of 
•Mujahideen* (The fighters for the Faith: Warriors of 



437 



Allah). Such are the advantages of matrimony 
CNlkah'). 

THE "AAFAAT" HAZARDS OF 'NIKAH' 
(MATRIMONY) 

There are three principal risks of marriage. 

I. The first danger is that of the married man 
becoming so hard pressed at times due to the 
encumbrances of a large family that in not being 
able to make both ends meet his earnings or 
income for livelihood may become 'suspect' or 
even 'Haram' (Illegitimate). It virtually 
tantamounts to the virtual devise of his own self 
and his family. 

It is in the 'Hadith' that on the Day of 
Judgement even if the pile of good deeds of a 
person be as high as a mountain, he will feel 
highly humiliated beside the Balance of Justice 
('Meezane AdP) when the questioner asks him 
"how did you cater for the livelihood and 
requirements of your family" and he is not able 
to give a satisfactory reply. He would stand 
there like the condemned, virtues forfeited while 
a resounding clarion call would be announcing 
that 'this is that person whose entire good deeds 
have been usurped by his family.' 

It is also In 'Hadith' that on the other hand his 
family members would be complaining and 
asking for justice that we were made to eat 
('Male Harem') food obtained through 



438 



illegitimate earnings.' It Is therefore argued that 
it is better for a person who fears that he would 
be liable to be put to such an unfortunate 
position, shoiilf riot ^% fof ^BWaV tf he can 
remain chaste. Otherwise he lis hoff o&er 
alternative left but to get married. 

The second danger lies in a married person not 
being able to; meet the following difficult 
consequences <rfBm1|rtmc«iy. 



(i) That he may £ not i be aWe* to lqokafter his 
family properly i.e> not be able to discharge 
their responsibilities fully, r 

(ii) That he rnay^ not 'be able r to bear the trials 
and tribulations of family Me with'fortitude. 

(Hi) That he rnay nqtt ^>e able to Keep up his 
con^osure. , He fnay Ipse |iis tamper on 
then^ of 

. h fs in the^Hedtth' that such a person is like a 
slave who absconds fiprri his duties. So, unless 
a married parson does not live upto the tenets 
of ima«mony,r ift * ^nner whet* prayers and 

, worship Iwould also^ can 
not took after t W*i^$W#lte*m&*& what 
is the tisrof Ipiri^t&f :^^'lie e?0ftence of 
an other person in distress? For the some 
reason, Eta** ;Sf# GW^&I^ Alaih) 
T rjerjiedv as under* pn ifcmNfrvM^fa*. 
and said I fear tN* %»*P Qur'ar* ^ 
should I enter into l^kah' when I don't need 



439 



to. I do not have to meet the responsibility of a 
woman. 

( Y T A : 1*11) ^ j%t* '<S& 'J4 j 

Women have (rights) similar to what 
(obligations) are upon them, in the desired 
way.... (2 : 228) 

Hazrat Ibrahim Adham (Rahmatullah Alaih) also 
almost said the same thing but in different 
words i.e. "why should I enter into matrimony 
when I don't need to. Hence why should I take 
it upon myself to cater for the responsibility of a 
woman. 

The third danger is that after marriage their 
responsibility becomes vital but at times it 
becomes superimposing to the extent that in 
catering for their requirements, one's 
preoccupations do not leave enough time wd 
the right turn of mind to say his prayers. It 
results in the man becoming negligent of the 
very purpose of his life in this world, of the 
•Akhirat'. This is the highest damage. It is 
tantamount to devastation. Allah has 
proclaimed. 

{ \ : 0>U3») t ^ /> & 

O Believers, let not your wealth or your 
children distract you from Allah's 
temembrance.... (63 : 9) 



440 

to ytflfcfesftoqe*! sri? to«m o.r ^vsr! ton ? .<■** 

If a person thinks that he would ,rjoj, faig able to 

honourably discharge his duties and responsibilities of 

this wojld and of^the. hereafter satisfactorily, as the 

Holy Pr%prTet1p^an^ ? b!e^ingi ^ 5 AliaK be upon 

him ) ^^^^^^g^J^^^^Jjetter for 

h,m n B%i^m^pm (Mm^&^ietim&mtwMw 

circurn^ipesgi At the same time, if he ' ^afraid of 
committing ('Zina') crimes of sex and libido he had' 
d^e^«fiterfiitedToly3#fe^ 

THE W£DDUSK3 CEREMONY AND US ALLIED , 

MATTJERtSc -jjiw aorraH ,ol bsan fnob ! nsriw 
e io ytihdtefroqss* srit *ioi i3te:> ot Ibe^'i noqa n 
There are five conditions for 'Nikah'snoui 

thru ^^m^stjm-rmm^ Mn^^mm £rp 'VaJ# 

29 Tii|.e te a tg&nmv TfeSh-fcJWJk <$Mim®m of that 

m ted* ^^^Im^o^s^^^ mmo ^ 

*toP° TmmmM Most 1r¥#adrtanttthingife#»e willing 
bne 9iT^fl!i»itp%p%!«»flyi«f the bTidfcuHtfwev*r if she 
r! .ai?>v*Wvi# mr&tjpMhfa iWbr&fele W sensibly 
» H lo tft^sforstaf^ th»m h*rt feih#J«r parents 

odt -° cfeesi©n«^ ithe^^m^^ow©^^ vv«lid. She 
' « bettet^b#rf1nf^rrn«i o^Hi^h these 

^ ri risrffeumsta^e«i*<ei»^uei«^dej8h«aldiiW treated 
as her assent. ,fcami6b6iq 

III. Two pious, reliable persons are *a must' as eye- 
>1SN^t^^h^rttj^4^,0tt^^er that, 
amongst the participants in the ceremony some 
%r<fup or people of recognised 1 !^ srfould also 

" r ^4)l«settte3w ujcai ion td O ■ • 

a'rfsHA fno'il iiov tjmMh -nsiblifb ' 



441 



The fourth condition is that the corfeuq^nce to 
marriage should be pronounced by the 
bridegroom and the 'Wali' (The sponsor) of the 
bride before others as under, as per 'Sunnat'. 

A. After the wedding address and prayers 
('Khutba-e-Nikah') the Wali should say, 
"Bismillah wa Alhumdu Lillah" "Jn the 
name of Allah and with His Blessings 'such 
and such' lady has been wedded to you in 
lieu of 'Haqqe Mehar' (The marriage gift 
sun lieu, payable by the hubby) 'of such 
and such' amount." 

B. In turn, simultaneously after the bride's 
consent has already been obtained, the 
bridegroom should < say "Bismillah wa 
Alhamdu Lillah, In the name of Allah and 
with His Blessings I accept it on this 'Haqqe 

> Mehar'." 

The purpose of 'Nikah' should be to have 
; !s the aforementioned presaged goals 
including the desire to lead a pious life with 
his partner in life, have children and to 
forestall the menace of lust and 
licentuousness. 

The-^fifth condition is that the woman should be 
worthy of it. There are about twenty reasons for 
which such a 'Nikah' can become 'Haram' e.g. * 

(i) A woman whose .('Iddat') period of 
abstention has not expired after the death 
to a?bub ^ i fie¥ J former husband or divorce from him. 



442 



c An idolator; apostate, atheist, non- 

i.e. non-believer in 
Allah, His Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him), the Day of 
Judgement and Akhirat. 

(Hi) A wayward woman who moves about freely 
with men of other sex. 

• (iv) A woman who may have partaken of the 
milk of the same mother of which her 
proposed husband may also have done so. 

(v) That if married, she would be the fifth 
incumbent wife of a man. 

(vi) That her sister or aunt may already be 
married to such a man. 

(vU) That she should go into the 'Nikah' of the 
same husband after divorce without 'Halala' 
; (Marriage to another person). 

(viii) In the event of being in 'Ahram' (Applies to 
both the man and the woman). 

(ix) That she may not be of marriageable age 
and consonance etc. 

THE QUALITIES TO LOOK FOR IN A WOMAN 
BEFORE MARRIAGE 

The eight principal traits are as follows:- 

i. The future wife, the woman should be pious 
and Allah fearing otherwise the following 
caiamaties can occur. 



she is dishonest, she can play ducks and 



443 



drakes with the 'MaT funds and assets x>f the 
house; Th^i husband will always remain 
worried and on tenter hooks. 
B. If she is ^islionest iri chastity i.e. is an 
adulterous:- ! ' ;t ' 

(i) If the husband remains quiet, his home life, 
marital love and 'Akhirat' will be wrecked. 
He will get a bad name to boot. 

(ii) If the husband can not remain quiet, it will 
be worse. The peace and 'tranquility of the 
home' will go into melting ptot, further. 

(iii) If he divorces her, the home and hearth will 
be ruined 1n any case, but' he may also 
suffer the pangs* of her separation, specially 
if she is beautiful. But the fact remains that 
it i$ always beftef to divorce her. 

It is related that a person complained of the 
infidelity and "impiety of his wife to the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
hirrt) He '(peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him} said', "Divorce .heri* He replied, "1 love her 
tob much." The Holy Prdpnet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be \ipon him) replied, "In that 
ease don't do so as you will' be in worse 
trouble." K is in the 'Hadifh' : that a greedy 
person who marines a woman for her beauty or 
for' her wealth loses both and never gets real 
satisfaction and happiness of married life. 
However if he marVies for the ('Been') Faith he 
will be amply rewarded oh all accounts. 



444 



II. 



The second quality to look for in a woman is 
her temperament. In ill-mannered, garrulous 
woman is always ungrateful and disqueitning, 
not the sort of person to have about the home.' 
A sensible man avoids marrying such a woman, 
if he does not want his life to be embittered and 
his 'Deen' Faith put in danger. 

III. The third redeeming feature, is her beauty. It is 
a sunnat to cast a glance on one's future wife 
before marrying her. The Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) once said 
that "there is apt to be a latent defect in the 
eyes of the Ansari girls which causes certain 
disgusting later on, hence it is better to see the 
girl before 'Nikah'." It is the considered view of 
the wise that those who marry without seeing 
the woman generally repent later. The saying of 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) that the woman should be for the 
'Deen' and not for her beauty means that the 
man should not get so enamoured of her 
charms that he should forget the Faith, which is 
the real thing. Its profound implication is that if 
a person performs Nikah in the 'Sunnat* of the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) to follow in his footsetps and to have 
children and a happy home, it is Taqwa'. 
(Piety: Bowing to will and command of Allah) 
Hazrat Imam Hunbal (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
married a one-eyed lady in preference to her 
sister who was very beautiful, as he knew that 
she was much wiser than her. 

IV. The fourth characteristic should be that the 



445 



woman's 'Mehr' (The marriage gift settlement) 
should be less. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) once remarked 
that "amongst women that woman is better 
whose 'Mehr' is less and the beauty and grace 
more. Large 'Mehr' is undesirable ('Makrooh'). 
He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
fixed the 'Mehr' of some women at ten 
'Dirhams' himself. He (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) did not allow the 'Mehr' of 
his own daughters to be more than four 
hundred dirhams (old Arabian coin) . 

V. The fifth important point is that the woman 
should be able to bear children. A nulliparious 
woman (A 'Banjh' woman not capable of giving 
birth to a child) is of no use. According to Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) a date-mat is better than her. 

VI. Sixthly, it is ideal to marry a virgin. You will get 
more love from her, unlike a woman who has 
had a husband before. She will not be able to 
remove him from her mind altogether. When 
Hazrat Jabar (Allah be pleased with him) 
married such a lady the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) remarked, 
"why did you not marry a virgin? You would 
have been amused by her more pleasantly. You 
could have had more sport with her." 

VII. Also, the woman should be well bred, sedate 
and pious. If to the contrary, the life of the 
husband and house hold will become miserable. 

VIII. Lastly, the woman should preferably not be 
from the near relatives. Because according to 



446 



Hadith it results in rather weak male offsprings. 
Perhaps due to comparatively lesser sexual urge 
towards the spouse? 

Vice versa, the parents of the girl should pay 
special attention to the upbringing of his daughter. She 
should be taught all relevant household functions and 
etiquette of proper behaviour and he brief her fully in 
affairs of the faith. 

The person looking for a suitable husband for 
his daughter should likewise see:- 

1. That the man is sedate, will bred and pious. 

2. That he is not an ill-tempered person. 

3. He should be fair looking with manly grace. 

4. He should be capable of shouldering the 
responsibilities of matrimony. 

5. He should not be a man of bad character. 

6. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that "it would 
tantamount to tyranny if a father marries his 
daughter to a person of contemptible character. 
It is like making a woman a slave." 

RIGHTS AND DUTIES AFTER NIKAH 

There are twelve vital things about 'Nikah' that 
are necessary to bear In mind to lead a happy married 
life according to Faith right from the day of wedlock 
As a matter of fact 'Nikah' is an essential aspect of 
'Deen\ Hence it is very important to understand its 
significance. 

I. The first thing is Valeema' (The weddjng 



447 



reception), it is a 'Sunnate Muwakkada' (A 
primary 'Sunnat': Essential 'Sunnat') . When 
Hazrat Abdur Rehman Bin Auf (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) performed 
'Nikah', the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) said: 

"Perform 'Valima'. Even if it be of a goat" 



And if he can't afford it, let him serve whatever he can 
to his guests. It will be treated as his Valima' but he 
has to perform this 'Sunnat', When the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) entered 
nto holy wedlock with Hazrat Safia (Allah be pleased 
with her) He offered dates and 'Satoo' (Grain cereal)' 
to the guests in 'Valima'. 

It should be performed the soonest after the 
wedding, latest within a week. It is a declaration to the 
effect that a certain gentleman has wedded a cer^n 
lady. In Arabia it is still customary to play on a Duff 
(An Arabian musical instrument: Stringed and leather 
acketed) happily, on this occasion. The merriment is 
in keeping with the spirit invoked. The joy de vivre is 
justified not only in itself but also due to its vital role in 
L advancement of human race the man bemg _the 
most eminent of all creations on the Gods earth. Duff 
and 'Sama' (Chorus singing) are it also 'Sunnat' at this 
juncture. According to Hazrat Rabi Bint Muawwiz 
(Allah be pleased with her) when the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) arrived the 



448 



next day after the night she had become* the bride, the 
girls were playing the 'Duff', singing traditional wedding 
songs rejoicingly. The moment they saw the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
they started carolling. He (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) was amused and remarked "Continue 
with what you were doing before." Obviously, as to 
applaud the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) is highly sedate and sober whereas 
the festivities in progress were rather light hearted. 
Intermingling the two was out of place. 

II. Secondly the man should treat his wife 
decently. She should be put to no anxiety or 
trouble. On the contrary the husband should 
share her woes. At times the woman is apt to 
be demanding, with pecularities akin to her sex. 
Therefore the husband should be understanding 
and accommodating. He should appreciate that 
the woman is born with a certain recondite 
weakness. The husband's greatness lies in being 
considerate. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said that "a 
husband who is patient with his wife in her ill 
temperate moments will be accorded ('ajr') a 
reward equal to that of the legendary fortitude 
CSabr') of the Prophet Ayub (peace of Allah be 
upon him). Also, at the time of his demise the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) said three things under his breath. 
"Say your prayers regularly, be kind to the 
slaves (both male and female) and have the fear 
of Allah in your hearts for your wives. They are 
dependent on you. Be graceful with them." 



449 



The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) set the finest example of the 
behaviour with the inmates of his household 
(The 'Ahle Bait'). He has said that:- 

"The best of ye is he who behaves in the 
best manner with his family members." 

I, 

The third propriety of marital bliss lies in the 
man's happy demeanour with his wife and 
family members. The more pleasant, good 
natured, polite and jovial the husband remains 
with his spouse, the more congenial will be the 
atmosphere of the house. It will become a 
happy home. To have an austere and 'reserved' 
attitude towards one's wife is not good. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) jocundly had a race with Hazrat 
Aisha Siddiqa (Allah be pleased with her). The 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) won the first time and she the next 
time. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) smilingly remarked. "This is 
a good response. We are quits now." 

Once, mirthful sounds were heard coming from 
the neighbouring house of a negroid family. It 
was a pleasant sight. The Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) appeared 
visibly cheered and asked Hazrat Aisha Siddiqa 
(Allah be pleased with her) if she would like to 



450 



witness their merriment. She nodded in assent, 
leaned over the extended arm of the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) and remained engrossed in the innocent 
frolicsome festivity of the children for quite 
sometime. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) had to ask her 
thrice if she had pleased herself. 

Likewise 'Amirul Momineen' (The chief of the 
'Momens', the Faithful) Hazrat Umare Farooq 
(Allah be pleased with him) who was in the 
prime of his youth at that time and had a 
commanding temperament used to say "One 
should behave with one's wife like one does 
with ones intimate mates. But when it comes to 
the leadership in the affairs of the home and 
hearth the man should live up to it." The sages 
of the time have also all along maintained that 
"the man should enter his house smilingly and 
go out of it soberly. "It behoves the man to be 
contented with whatever be present for him to 
eat in the home, the major responsibility being 
of looking after his wife and children. He should 
not crib. 

The fourth important factor to bear in mind is to 
keep a proper balance in things. The happiness 
of the home is one thing but to allow its 
atmosphere to become lax and permissive is 
another. It is essential for his wife to remain 
within bounds, for the woman is Inherently 
weak, same as the man is apt to be diversive at 
times and has to be kept in check with tact and 
discretion. 



451 



The man should not allow undue latitude to his 
wife. In short he has to act like a ('Hakime 
Haziq') competent physician with her so that her 
weaknesses are checked timely and the disease 
if any not be allowed to get out of control. He 
has to make sure that the preventive measures 
prescribed by him are followed by his wife. The 
Almighty Allah has ordained. 

(Ti :*Ljl) tZ3\ Js. Oy£ 'jbr'J\ 

"Men are the protectors and maintainers 
of women (inherently blessed with the 
capability of enforcing discipline over the 
women)." (4 : 34) 

And the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has said. 

"The man who acts as the slave of 
his wife is deplorable." 1 

It follows that the wife should be happy in 
behaving like a dedicated servant and ministrant 
to the husband. On his part, the husband 
should be polite* but capable of enforcing the 
discipline. Yet, he should be sedately patient as 
the woman is apt to go haywire at times. The 
age old saying that the woman is like the rib 
bone. It can be bent only so much, othewise it 
will break, can not be gainsaid or ignored. 

1. Ithaf al-Sadah al-Muttaqin, al-Zubaydi, Printed by Taswir Beirut, 
5 : 356, 8 : 153; Al-Mughni 'au Haml al-Asfar, al-'Iraqi, Printed 
by 'Isa al-Halabi, 2 : 46; Tazkiiah al-Mudu'at al-Fitani, Taswir 
Beirut, 128. 



452 



When it comes to matter of the honour and 
dignity of the home, the husband should 
sensibly control things and see that: 

A. The wife should remain at home 

B. She should not hobnob with strangers. ('Na 
Mam-am') . 

C. She should not be in the habit of peeping 
out of her house through the door or the 
window. It is the evil beholding eye that is 
the most mistaken. 

Hence the patience of the unfortunate husband 
whose wife may have a lax code of morals in 
likely to be put to test severely. He has to make 
sure right from the beginning that his wife does 
not adopt wayward ways or else the stigma of 
the man and his family is likely to be badly 
besmirched. Nevertheless to be unduly 
suspicious and doubt the innocence of the wife 
is bad. To be unnecessarily inquisitive or to. 
question the integrity of the wife over mere 
trifles is worse. 

Once the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) returned from a journey in 
the evening and instructed all those present not 
to go home and stay the night there. Two of 
them disobeyed him, with the result that when 
they reached home they had to encounter 
incongenial things. 

Hazrat Ali Kiramul Wajhahu (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said, "Don't 
overtax your wives with the weight of honour. 
Otherwise people will start misconstruing things 
and you will get a bad name for nothing." The 



453 



main thing is that as far as possible she should 
not see the face of a ('Na Mahram') stranger. 

Once the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him), asked his beloved daughter 
Hazrat Fatima (Allah be pleased with her), 
"what is the best thing for a woman to do?" She 
promptly replied, "That a 'Na Mahram' should 
not see a stranger. ('Na Mahram'). The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) was pleased and said, "You are the apple 
of my eye." 

Hazrat Ma'az (Rahmatullah Alaih) is said to 
have taken his wife severely to, task for her habit 
of peeping out through the window. He also 
scolded her for having taken half an apple 
herself and for having given the other half to 
the house slave ('Ghulam'). 

Hazrat Umar (Allah be pleased with him) once 
said, "Don't allow your women to wear 
attractive clothes most of the time, so that they 
may stay at home. As soon as a woman wears 
good clothes she instinctively wants to go out 
and display them to others." 

In the early period, during the time of the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) women were allowed to come and say 
their prayers in last rows in the mosque but later 
the 'Sahaba-e-Kiram' (The worthy companions 
of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) had to stop this practice for 
these reasons. In the beginning the fully covered 



454 



elderly ladies were permitted but later they were 
also forbidden to enter the mosque. 

Summum bonum, the status of this discourse is 
outlined by the 'Hadith-e-Mubarak' that once a 
blind man came to pay his respects to the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him). Thereupon he (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) asked Hazrat 'A'isha 
Siddiqa (Allah be pleased with her) and other 
ladies present to withdraw. The blind man 
humbly remarked. "But I am blind." The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) replied, "Yes, indeed you are but they are 
not blind." 

The sixth essentiality is that it is the husband's 
responsibility to do his very best to provide 
satisfactory 'Nan-o-Nafqa' (livelihood: 
Requirements of life) to his wife and family. He 
should strike a respectable mean between the 
two extremities viz he should neither be miserly 
nor extravagant, He should remember that in 
his discharging this vital responsibility he is 
entitled to greater ('Sawab') return and reward 
from Allah than in charity. And as for the 
reward of charity, the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said that a 
person who gives one dinar (Arabian gold coin) 
for 'Jehad* or sets a slave free is amply 
rewarded by Allah. 

It behoves a husband not to take a good meal 
without his wife. If he happens to do so he 



455 



should conceal it from his wife. Likewise it is not 
sensible to speak flavouringly about sumptuous 
meals before his wife and family when he can 
not afford to have them prepared at home. 

Hazrat Imam Ibne Seereen (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
used to say that the husband should try and 
partake of a good meal with his wife and family 
at least once in a week. He should not forget to 
take 'Halwa' (A Sweet dish) or sweets with it. It 
is miserly not to do so, whether a guest be 
present in such a repast or not. To altogether 
give-up the dessert in such family get togethers 
is tantamount to take away the sweetness from 
the family life. 

The vital thing is that the 'Nano Nafqa' i.e. the 
eatables and other items of the livelihood should 
be of 'Male Halal' i.e. well earned, legitimately 
obtained means. It is in the 'Hadith Sharif that 
a family which eats together in friendly pleasant 
atmosphere is blessed by Allah. Angels pray for 
their welfare. Vice versa, the food eaten out of 
ill obtained, illegitimate sources is immoral, 
hence un-harmonious to the sanctity of good 
family life. A husband who resorts to ignoble 
means to bring up his wife and family, invokes 
Allah's wrath on alt. 

It is also necessary for the husband to make 
sure that his wife has the necessary ('Ilm') 
knowledge of the following, as the barest 
miximum, to begin with. 

1) Cleanliness and hygiene . 



456 



2) 'Namaz' 

3) The essentialities during her monthly 
periods. 

The Almighty Allah has ordained: 

* ■ 

.... . ( »£ 9 1aI j ^.jiil lj» jijUl 1^0 
("V : ^^l) 

O Believers, guard yourselves and your 
families against a Fire (66 : 6) 

Many women do not know it. They should be 
told that if the menses of a woman stops before 
sunset, she has to say her *Asr' prayers ('Qaza') 
belated after purification. 

VIII. The eighth propriety is that if a person has two 
wives he should be just and fair to them both: It 
is in the 'Hadith' that, husband will be half 
paralysed on the Day of Judgement who will be 
unfair to one of his two wives. The husband 
should be fair and equitable to both his wives in 
giving them presents and spending the nights 
with them. It is however not possible for a 
husband to love both wives equally. For 
instance the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) used to spend his nights 
separately with his wives. However, he (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) used to like 
Hazrat 'A'isha Siddlqa (Allah be pleased with 
her) the most. He used to pray to Allah and 
say, "I can't help it. My heart is more disposed 
towards her." 

If a husband gets fed up with his wife and has 



457 



no inclination left in his heart for her, he may as 
well leave her but not keep her as his prisoner. 
On the same principle the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) was on the 
verge of divorcing Hazrat Sooda (Allah be 
pleased with her) when she begged of Him not 
to do so, surrendered her turn to Hazrat 'A'isha 
Siddiqa (Allah be pleased with her) and said, 
"Kindly bestow upon me the honour to be 
called your wife on the Day of Judgement." He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
accepted her plea. Thereafter he used to spend 
two nights with Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa (Allah be 
pleased with her) and one night with his other 
wives. 

The nineth thing is that in the following 
eventuality the husband should act as under:- 

A. In case the wife is disobedient and not in his 
control, he should try and appease her with 
patience and kindness. 

B. If she is still stubborn, he should show his 
displeasure with her and should go to sleep 
with his back towards her. 

C. Is she does not desist still, he should sleep, 
away from her for three nights. 

D. If she still persists in her attitude, he should 
give her a beating but with care that it is not 
cruel. He should insure that her face is not 
hurt and she is not wounded. 

E. , He can show his resentment towards her 

until a month if she declines to perform any 
essential ('Rukn') element of Islam. 



458 



It is stated that the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) had to similarly 
show his unhappiness to each one of his wives 
and remained away from them for a period of 
one month. 

X. The tenth advice is that the man should not 
treat his wife as if she is an animal and pounce 
on her for marital conjugation like a vulture on 
its prey. Before such affinity the husband should 
make love to her embracing, kissing and 
fondling her amorously for the while. It is stated 
that the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) has advised that the man 
should not fall upon his spouse like an animal 
but should send the 'Qasid' (A messenger) first. 
The reference, was obviously to the man kissing 
his wife first. Before the act he should say. 

"In the name of Allah, the Most High, the 
Great I begin. Allah is Great, Allah is 
Great." 

It is much better if he recites the 'Soorae Ikhlas' also at 
the same time. Then he shoud say the following: 

"O Allah! Keep the Satan aside from us 
and Keep the Satan away from that which 

Thou hast provided us." 
V * 
It is iri^he 'Hadith' that the child born to a person who 
does so will be protected against the Satan. At the time 



459 

of discharge he should keep the following 'Ayat' (The 
holy verse) in mind but he should not utter it. 

And it is He who has created a mortal 
from water, and made for him kindred of 
blood and marriage.... (25 : 54) 

The man should hold for a while and cohere so that 
she also discharges herself. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that the following things indicate 
the weak position of a man. 

(i) That a person should be friendly with a man 
and he should not enquire his name. 

(ii) That one. should pay his regards to someone 
and he may decline to accept them by his 
attitude. 

(iii) That a man should start intercourse with his 
wife, without its preamble of kissing her and not 
have the patience to hold for a while until his 
wife too has had a discharge. 

According to a 'Rivayat' (Anecdote: Narration) 
ex Hazrat Ali,. Hazrat Abu Huraira and Hazrat Muawya 
(Allah be pleased with them) that to go to bed with 
one's spouse is 'Makrooh' (Undesirable) on the 
following nights as the Satan's are abroad on such 
ocassions. 



460 



1. The 14th night 

2. The 15th night 

3. The last night of the lunar month. 

Of course, the question of having marital 
conjugation with one's wife when she is in her periods 
is out of question. Nevertheless the man can sleep 
without his clothes on when she is in such a state. 
Similarly one should also not go near his wife for 
intimacy untill she has had a proper bath after the 
menses. Likewise the man and woman should wash 
*heir bodies before having an intercourse again after 
having had an intercourse alreddy. 

XI. As soon as a child is born, 'Azan' should be 
recited in his right ear and Takbir' in his left 
ear. It is a customary blessing to do so. 
According to 'Hadith' it lends safety to the child, 
specially against all juvenile ailments. Thereafter 
it is essential that:- 

A. The child should be given a good name. 
Names like Abdullah and Abdur Rahman 
are blessed. 

' # 

B. 'Aqeeqa* should be performed (Aqeeqa: 
offering in qratitude on child birth as per 
'Sunnat'). 

(i) For a boy two rams or goats are generally 
proffered. Even one would do. 

(ii) For a girl one ram or goat should be given in 
'Aqiqah'. 



461 



C. It is 'Sunnat' and an age old custom to 
make the infant savour something sweet as 
a happy augury. 

D. So should the hair of the infant be had 
removed after ten days. It is a 'Sunnat' to 
do so. Also gold or silver equivalent to the 
child's hair weight should be given in 
'Sadaqa'. 

E. Also to make merry on the birth of a son 
and to look down upon the birth of a 
daughter is showing ignorance and 
ingratitude of the first water. Allah knows 
what is best and does what is best. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that if a person has three 
daughters or three sisters and the man exerts for them 
in life, Allah will bless him for it. The principle is the 
same, whether the girls be more or less in number. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has also observed that "a father who has 
one daughter is bowed down by the weight of woe on 
account of her. The father who has the responsibility of 
marrying two daughters is more heavily burdened but 
the man who has three daughters or more is crucially 
placed and deserves full sympathy and cooperation 
from all faithful. He will go to ('Jannat') Paradise with 
me if he is able to discharge his duty with honour." He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) has further 
said that a daughter always has the first preference 
over the son and every one of the family likes it. 
Hence, a father who brings fruit from the bazaar 
should give it to the daughter first, than to the son. 



462 



This act is as good as giving 'Sadaqa' with a tearful 
heart in the love of Allah. And only one who has love 
and fear of Allah in his heart will neve, be sent to Hell 
(the 'Dozakh'). 

XII. The most uncherished word in the marital union 
is ('Talaq') i.e. divorce. It has such an 
uncharitable thing that no one likes to hear it It 
hurts the wife the most. Hence it behoves the 
husband to try and never use it; as, to hurt the 
feelings of any one is not good. Allah likes 
compassionate people. Nevertheless, in case of 
dire emergency the husband should curb his 
anger resolutely and give only one Talaq' 
(Talaq': Divorce: Pronouncement of divorce). It 
is ('Makrooh') undesirable to give three Talaqs' 
at one and the same time. He should also know 
that (Talaq') divorce is ('Haram') disallowed in 
the following states. 

(i) During the menses of his wife. 

(ii) During state of her purity if the husband had 
cohabited with her. Kindness and 
compassion should be the principal traits of 
the man who is contemplating to divorce his 
wife. He must have the fear of Allah in his 
heart. He should all the time be telling 
himself, "No. I am angry and decisions taken 
in anger are always prone to be hurried, one- 
sided, maligned and prejudiced. So let me 
cool down and.be sober and considerate." 

God forbid, if the Talaq' is effected the 
husband must behave gentlemanly with his 



463 



wife and give her a parting present with 
kind words, in an adequate manner. 

(iii) In such an unfortunate eventuality he 
should never tell the reason of divorcing his 
wife to others, to protect her from 
embarrassment. Somebody asked a person 
in such a situation as to why he had 
divorced his wife. He sedately replied, 
"Now, she is an alien lady. I have no right 
to disavow the sanctity of her secret." 

It may therefore not be misconstrued from the 
foregoing that all the responsibilities and liabilities are 
levied on the woman, the wife and the man, the 
husband is absolved of them. It is stated in the 'Hadith' 
that " 'Sajda' is allowed only before Allah but if it was 
ever permitted to anyone else, the wife would have 
been ordained to perform 'Sajda' (To lie humbly 
prostrate: Prone on the ground head bowed down in 
reverence and worship) before her husband to pay 
homage to him. Hence, his wife being his honour; his 
direct, paramount charge, it is his singular responsibility 
to look after her commensurate with this duty. 

The husband has the right over his wife that:- 

A. She should not leave the house without his 
permission. 

B. She should not have the tendency to expose 
herself before the others. 

C. She should not have the tendency to peep out 
of the door of the house or its windows. 

D. She should "not disclose intimate details of her 



464 



marital life to anyone. 

E. She should be honest in the expenditure of 
household funds. She should not play ducks 
and drakes with the family assets on her own 
ornamentation and beautification. 

F. She should give preference to the relatives of 
her husbands over her own. In short, the 
happiness of her husband in all matters should 
be her prime objective. 

G. She should abstain from pecking at her 
husband. Nor should she keep on making 
demands of unnecessary nature on her husband 
which they may not be able to afford. 

H. She should not be proud of her beauty and 
treat her husband disrespectfully. She must 
never ask for 'Talaq' from her husband in a 
casual way. Nor should she be taunting her 
husband that she has not come across any 
happiness with him, specially if they be poor. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) once said that "I have seen many 
women in Hell who looked alike. On enquiry, I was 
informed that they were too self-centered. They lacked 
qualities of patience and contentment. They were 
ungrateful for what they had and used to curse and 
condemn their husbands for some reason or the 
other." 

TRADE AND VOCATION FOR LIVELIHOOD 

The man has to know the principles of earning 
his livelihood in a befitting manner, In his journey 



465 



towards 'Akhirat', In this life. It is inevitable. Yet he has 
to strike a sensible mean between this world and the 
Hereafter. Hence it is imperative that:- 

(i) The livelihood earned is legitimate ('Halal'). 

(ii) The gaiety and greed of this world does not 
• overtake man at the expense of the 'Akhrat', 

for, the good 'Akhirat' is the ultimate goal of 
man. Hence the betterment of this world also 
lies in having 'TawakkaF (Absolute Faith and 
contentment) in Allah. 

VIRTUES OF TRADE AND VOCATION 

Its five distinct features are as under:- The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
was seated with his sahabah (Allah be pleased with 
them) one fine morning. They saw a healthy strong 
young man walk hurriedly into a shop. One of the 
Sahabah remarked. "Only if he could rise up as early 
as this and be up and doing in the cause of Allah in 
•Jehad'." The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) responded. "Don't say so. For a 
person who is actively occupied in earning a legitimate 
livelihood for his parents and the members of his 
family is also in a way striving for Allah and has its 
reward. Hence it is not less than of 'Jehad' (To fight 
for Allah in His cause) to do so." But, if the purpose 
be to relish the riches of this world and become 
negligent of the Hereafter is worldly lust, then it is a 
satanic deed which has its retribution. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 



466 



be upon him) has further said:- "That a responsible, 
hard working person in pursuit of ('Rizqe Halal'j 
legitimate livelihood earned with the sweat of his brow 
for himself and. his family, will rise up like an ascending 
full moon, his face glowing on the Day of Judgement, 
if he has no greed and lust for the lures of life." 

"That a true and honest trader in this world will 
be recounted amongst the elite [i.e., the 'Shuhada' 
(Martyrs) and 'Siddiqeen* (A good status of an elite 
Faithful)] in the next world." 

"That Allah likes the man who works manually 
and earns a hard-earned living. His assets may be 
meagre but they are pious." 

"That nine out of ten parts of earning a good 
livelihood by man are inherent in trade and 
commerce." 

« 

"That a person who Resorts to begging, to earn 
his livelihood increases the state of his degraded 
poverty seventy times by doig so." 

Once Hazrat Isa (The Holy Christ) (peace of 
Allah be upon him) asked a person as to what he did 
to earn a living. He replied, "I remain engrossed in the 
worship of Allah." He again enquired about the source 
of his living. He answered, "My brother provides me 
with food and other basic requirements." Hazrat Isa 
(peace of Allah be upon him) remarked, "Then he is a 
greater (worshipper) saint than you are." 

Hazrat Umar (Allah be pleased with him) once 



467 



remarked "Don't be casual in earning an honest living. 
It is essential to do your best. Do not attribute your 
failures to Him by saying that Allah provides 'Rizq' and 
He has provided me only this much. He has the 
Supreme Power to bestow gold and silver from the 
heaven above, but in point of fact there has got to be 
a 'Vaseela' (A source) for it." 

Luqman Hakim (Rahmatullah Alaih), the great 
sage once gave advice to his son and said, "Never give 
up trade or a good vocation to earn an honest living, 
as, a person who is destitute and dependent on others, 
his ('Deen') Faith becomes constricted, wisdom 
weakened and courtesy constrained to the extent that 
people start abhoring him. 

Somebody asked a discerning person as to who 
is better, a saintly person or an honest tradesman, 
"The trader" he replied without hesitation, 
instantaneously. A trader, because he is the more 
severely tested of the two, since the Satan keeps on 
sparring with him temptingly. Thus he is like a 
'Mujahid' who battles with the devil relentlessly with 
each movement of the scale when he is weighing the 
goods for sale. On the other hand an 'Abid' (The 
worshipper), a pious person remains on guard against 
him all the time. The former chases him in combat. 
The later avoids him. 

Once, Hazrat Omar (Allah be pleased with him) 
remarked that he does not fear death but he would 
rather that he died during his ('Kasbe Halal') labour to 
earn an honest living for his family than in any other 
state. 



468 



Somebody asked Imam Ahmad bin Hunbal 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) about the status of that man who 
was busy in saying prayers in the mosque all the time 
and said that "Allah will provide me 'Rizq' i.e. the 
livelihood to exist on." Hazrat Hunbal (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) vehemently replied, "He is ('Jahil') ignorant. He 
is unaware of 'Shariate Islamia' viz the Islamic code of 
conduct, for the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) has clearly stated that 'the 'Rizq' of 
each person is contained in his effort and struggle to 
earn the livelihood for himself and his family. 

Once Imam Auzai (Rahmatullah Alaih) saw 
Hazrat Ibrahim Addham (Rahmatullah Alaih) carrying 
faggots on his shoulders and asked him, "How long 
are you going to carry on in this state. Your brothers 
in faith who are well to do and admire you, are ready 
to serve you." He replied, "We had better keep quiet, 
for it Js in the 'Hadith' that, that person becomes 
entitled to go to Paradise who is seen at a place not 
worthy of his status in his efforts to earn an honest 
living for himself." 

Question? The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said:- 

>J' 'A 'Jt 'cfj 'J^' fj\ >j> £ 

^ i£0 'J^Ci\ #;jrj 'd<j jU, w 'J» 

"I have not been divinely commanded to 
collect property and to become of me 
traders but I have been commanded by 
Allah Almighty: "So glorify the Praise of 
Thy Lord and be of those who postrate 



469 



and worship Thy Lord until there comes 
untd you the Hour that is Certain (i.e., 
death)." (15:98,99) 

Answer. If a person is financially so sound that 
he can look after himself and his family with it, it is 
better for him to devote himself to the worship of Allah 
with dedication instead. If he is not contented and has 
greed to acquire more and more, he is obviously 
pursuing this world's happiness in preference to that of 
the 'Akhirat' hence he is liable to be taken to task by 
Allah, severely. So, if a person is blessed with pious 
means of livelihood, although meagre and just enough 
to sustain him and his dependents, it is best for him to 
be content with it, count his blessings and remain 
engrossed in the thanks giving to Allah and in His 
worship. To look for more is erroneous. 

In final analysis, however there is no harm for 
the people of the following categories to be considered 
exempt from earning their own living for reasons which 
are self-explanatory. There is no harm if their 
livelihood consisting of the barest minimum to subsist 
on, should reach them at the loving hands of those 
who may serve them without putting them under any 
debt of obligation out of their honest earnings, to 
please Allah. 

(i) A person learning an 'Ilm' or knowledge which 
may be beneficial for the betterment of people 
in ('Deen-o-Dunya') this life and in the hereafter 
I.e. pursuits like that of the 'Shariat' or 'Tib' 
(The Faith or Medicine) etc. 

(ii) A person who is the trustee of such affairs of 
grave magnitude that to disturb him. may cause 



470 



hinderance in his singular concentration. The 
muse such a person is always of unique 
advantage to one and all. 

(iii) A venerated saint who may have completely 
disengaged himself from all cares of this world 
due to his total occupation in the love of the 
'Marifat' of Allah and veneration of His Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him). The principal forte of such a man is 
Tassawuf (Engrossment in adoration, worship 
and faithful service to Allah) . 

(iv) It applies also to the person who may be 
similarly confined in some 'Khanqah' i.e. a 
monastry. 

In the olden times there was a 'Vali-e-Kamil' i.e. 
a saint of exalted status. He had three hundred and 
sixty friends. He used to be a guest of each one of 
them once a year to their extreme happiness and 
gratitude. Likewise an other 'Vail' had thirty friends. 
He used to be the welcome guest of each one of 
them, once, every month. These extenuating 
circumstances speak for themselves. 

THE PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE EARNING 
OF ONE'S LIVELIHOOD ACCORDING TO 
'SHARIAT 

The vital aspects of 'Bai\ 'Rlba', 'Qarz* and 
'Partnership' - 'Shirakat' have been elucidated in this 
part of our discourse on this subject including other 
factors governing the legitimate earning of one's 
livelihood according to the dictates of 'Fiqh' (Islamic 
law). 



471 



There are three important things in *Baf i.e the 
sale and purchase of things. 

(I) The purchaser of goods. 

(II) The seller of goods called the 'Aaqid'. 

(III) The goods called the 'Maqood Elaih'. 

I. The first element is the 4 Aqid\ the seller. The 
'Aqid' i.e. the seller should not deal with the 
following five categories of people. 

A. A minor. 

B. A mad or insane person. A person not in his 
senses. 

C. A (Slave person, male or female). 

D. A blind person. 

E. A person who earns illegally and eats unlawful 
food. 

To not to have a recourse to such persons in 
buying and selling is based on rugged common 
sense lest otherwise there should be serious 
repercussions later. For the some reason Hazrat 
Umar (Allah be pleased with him) used to go to 
the market place with a hunter in hand and flog 
the defaulters for deviating from instructions 
given. It follows from the above that:- 

According to Imam Shafi'i (Allah's Mercy be on 
him) if a person buys a thing from a minor boy, it 
will not be valid even though it may be on the 



472 



instructions of his Vakil', the principal owner. 
Same applies to an insane person. In case of a 
mishap the buyer will be responsible for it and 
liable to (Tawan') a fine. 

Similarly, to buy a thing from a slave without the 
knowledge and approval of the principal owner is 
not permissible. The defaulter will be liable to a 
fine in lieu. This is all the more applicable to a 
blind person. Likewise, to have such commercial 
t dealings with unreliable people of ignoble 
conduct of the following kinds is also not valid for 
obvious reasons. 

jl. A tyrant - a ruthless person. 

2. A usurer. 

3. A drunkard. 

4. A person known for swearing wrongly. A 
person who gives false statements as a 
witness. 

5. A dacoit or a thief. 

6. A person who indulges in bribery and 
corruption. 

1. A person of doubtful character. 

However, dealings with them on cast iron safe 
grounds can be considered, when no loss or 
danger is anticipated and the transaction is 
clear. 

To have such dealings with 'Yahood o Nasara' 



473 



is permissible but no presents can be exchanged 
according to the Holy Book. Nor can a Muslim 
Slave male or female be* sold to them. 
Intermarriage with them is also disallowed. 

In case of war, no weapons can be sold to the 
enemy of Faith. Nor are dealings of any kind 
allowed with them, under the circumstances. It 
tantamounts to treachery. 

The second element is the 'Mai' (The goods) . 
Six things are necessary for it. 

1. The l Mal' should not be dirty or impious 
('Najs'). Hence, whereas the musk and silk 
worms are permitted, trading in dogs, 
swines, elephant's tusks, liqour, dead 
animals and their fat is disallowed. 

2. Trade is allowed on reasonable profit but 
not at any cost. 

3. Accordingly marketing of undesirable 
objects like the mice, snakes, scorpions and 
other repelling menagerie is not permitted. 
There is however no harm in trading in lion 
or leopard skin. 

4. Likewise, buying and selling of beautiful 
birds like parrots and peacocks is permitted. 

5. But sale and purchase of musical 
instruments like 'Chang' rubab and Barbat' 
(Traditional Arabian musical instruments) is 
forbidden for obvious ethical reasons. 



474 



6. Children's toys in the shape of animals, 
generally made of clay are not allowed.' 
However, if such toys be in the form of 
trees, flowers etc. , they are permitted. 

The third plausible condition is that a person 
can only sell that thing which may belong to 
him or he may be authorised to sell it by its 
legitimate owner. On the same principal the 
husband can not sell any article belonging to his 
wife without her permission and vice versa. 
The fourth condition is that only those things 
can be sold whose physical possession may be 
handed over to the buyer. Under the 
circumstances the goods that are loaded on the 
camel back, the milk that has not been yielded 
can not be sold. Nor for that matter can that 
.'Laundi' i.e. the slave girl be sold who has a 
suckling child, as the child is not included in the 
bargain nor can it be separated from the 
mother. 

The fifth condition is that the quantity of goods 
and the standard of their quality should be 
specified. Hence to say that 'one bundle of 
these bundles* or 'one goat from this herd' is not 
correct, barring of course saying that wheat out 
of this bag or nuts from this mound' where the 
quality is uniform and quantity is specified - 
weighed and given, is in order. 

The sixth condition is that the articles bought 
should be taken into physical possession and 
then resold. Forward sale of imaginary goods 
on conjecture is not allowed. 



475 



. The third elements is the 'Aqd' i.e. the 
agreement. It should be pronounced clearly by the 
buyer and the seller both. In bargains across the 
counter or face to face the buyer should say, indicate 
by word and gesture that he is buying some 
merchandise on a specified price. The seller should 
also confirm its sale in so many words. 

Also the pre-requisite of a clear sale is that it 
should not be conditional. For instance:- 

A. If a man says that I am buying these logs of 
wood on the condition that they may be 
delivered at my house. 

B. Or 'I am buying this wheat but I shall accept it , 
only after it is ground' or 'also in case there is 
some demand of loan also assigned to it.' 

In short, in order to forestall controversies later, 
everything has got to be well-defined. This applies 
specially to mortgage or sale of things of value before 
witnesses or a guarantor. 

The second 'Aqd' is 'Riba' which pertains to 
cash ('Naqd') and the commodity of wheat etc. Here 
too the transaction of cash sale and purchase is 
'Haram' (Unpermissible) if goods are given on credit. 
For example, in the sale of gold and silver the sale can 
not be considered valid unless both the buyer and 
seller are present and the possession of the commodity 
sold has been duly handed over to the buyer against 
the agreed price. 



476 



To give goods on credit and charge more for 
them is 'Haram'. Same applies to payment of goods in 
gold. Vice-versa to repay for a transient made by 
'Haveeva' gold ('A town') in which gold and silver are 
intermixed is not fair, for the some quantity of gold 
transacted. 

Likewise to evaluate a rope of pearls on a gold 
string against gold is obviously not valid as the pearls 
and the gold are different commodities, nor can one. 
accept such a thing on part paid for basis and part 
unpaid for, in bargain. It also applies to a similar 
transaction of two different commodities of grains, 
unequal in kind and quality. 

Fpr the some reason, as the transaction of the 
rope of pearls on a gold lace is invalid, the philosophy 
of selling the gold embroidered cloth for gold is not 
correct. Furthermore, in case of more than one 
commodity, the intermixing of their value to a sjngle 
unit of exchange value is not in order. Nor should the 
weight of the commodity be on a different scale at the 
time of their wieghtment. 

Likewise, to give the butcher a goat vice meat, 
to give flour in place of bread and to give the oil seeds 
to the oil seller for oil is not proper. These principles 
are specially appliable for transactious of commodities 
made for their resale after purchase. The concept that 
the source of a thing is equivalent to its and product is 
not correct. Surely, the oil seeds can not be equivalent 
to oil product or price- wise. Such unequitable 
transactions become a source of many a feud hence 
they have been banned. The common errors of 



477 



practice and payment or arbitrary basis are. 

A. To buy products of food grains for food grains 
treating them equivalent in status. Like flour, 
bread etc. of equal weight can not be measured 
as of equivalent value to grain itself. 

B. Similarly grapes are not equivalent to vinegar or 
honey obtained from a honey suckle on a 
grape-vine. 

C. Likewise, milk can also not be treated at par 
with butter and yeast. 

The third 'Aqd' is that of 'Sulm' i.e. barter or 
exchange. Ten things are of the essence in it. 

(i) In this agreement to buy and sell, the buyer and 
seller should clearly indicate and pronounce the 
details of the transaction. For instance the seller 
should state that "I am giving silver, gold or 
cloth - whatever the commodity may be, in 
exchange for one donkey worth load of, say- 
grain of specified quality together with relevant 
details so that the other party may fully know of 
the transaction and confirm its receipt as such, 
on mutual agreement. 

(ii) It's second important aspect is that there should 
be no random transaction. The weight, quality 
and its measurement, as the case may be must 
be clearly known. 

(iii) The thrid condition is that the inventory of 
goods 'Ra'sul Mai' should be handed over, 
exchanged. 



478 



(iv) The fourth condition is that only those things 
should be given, sold, whose status may be 
clear, specially in terms of assesment of their 
value. Hence there can not be any possibility of 
a dispute if things like bread, animals, wool, 
silk, meat etc. are offered as against complex 
things having some singular craftmanship or 
ingenuity like a Turkish bow, a silk threaded 
shoe, socks made of multiple fibres etc. 
However, in view of its insignificant ingredients 
of water and salt, the 'Sulm' in bread is in 
order. 

(v) In time-stipulated bargain the date of maturity of 
transaction should be absolutely clear. For 
instance to say that 'I am bargaining for or 
buying this producer when it is harvested, is 
wrong. But, if instead on 'Nauroze' (The Iranian 
New Year) is said the date will be vividly > 
without any doubt. Similarly to say only 
'Jamadf would mean 'Jamadiul AwwaP (Islamic 
month). 

(vi) The sixth condition is that 'Sulm' should be 
made realistically according to the promised 
time of its delivery. For instance 'Sulm' on fruit 
is valid if the fruit ripens in time for delivery to 
the buyer but in case there is a delay then the 
transaction has to be cancelled if the buyer can 
not give any more time for the fulfilment of 
agreement. 

(vii) Likewise the place of delivery must be specified, 
to forestall controversy later. 

(viii) It is also wrong to point out towards a field and 



479 



speak of its grain or to raise a finger towards an 
orchard and say that it's grapes will be given on 
'Sulm'. 

(ix) The nineth condition is that unique things of 
valuable nature should not be given on 'Sulm', 
like rare large pearls, a beautiful maiden (A 
slave girl) or a handsome slave. 

(x) Likewise 'Sulm' should also not be offered in 
food grains, at random, when the commodity in 
question be a kind of grain in itself like wheat, 
barley etc. 

The fourth 'Aqd', element is the gain whether it 
may be in the form of remuneration or profit its 
general principles are more or less the same as those 
relating to trading i.e. buying or selling of goods. 

The remuneration to be paid must be clearly 
specified, otherwise the 'Ijara' (The remuneration) or 
profit, will be invalid. 

A. For instance, to give the task of constructing a 
house to some one without indicating the details 
of its structure is irregular. 

B. Similarly, to not to pre-indicate the 
remuneration to a labourer and to give a 
butcher the hide of an animal or to give the 
grinder of unspecified quantity of grain its husk 
or some flour, is wrong. 

C. Likewise, to say that 'I am giving you this shop 
on a monthly rental of one dinar per month is 
wrong unless the period for which it is given is 
also specified. 



480 



As for the profit, the following five 
considerations are of the essence. 

(i) The first condition is that the thing on which a 
beneficial remuneration is accepted or a gain 
obtained should not be a sinecure. 
Commensurate value, work or labour should be 
involved in it. It should not be for such trivial 
things as to spread a wet cloth for drying or to 
smell a flower. It is like selling a grain of wheat. 
It is also same as taking brokerage for selling the 
goods of a merchant of high sounding name 
with inferior goods, which may yet be selling 
like hot cakes. To take brokerage or commission 
on the sale of things of undetermined value on 
percentage basis or on per piece, per lot or per 
item basis is also illogical and unacceptable due 
to absolute approximation and obscurity in such 
transactions. In such cases not only the amount 
of effort or labour involved is not known but it 
may also at times tantamount to extortionism in 
terms of profit. 

(ii) The second condition is that the 'A}ara' or profit 
sharing should be from the profit itself and not 
on the capital value of goods. Hence to 
consider one's self the owner of the garden 
which may have been taken to eat its fruit or 
take a cow for its milk against its fodder is 
highly irregular. In both cases the fruit and 
fodder have a secondary importance. Vice 
versa, it becomes relevant when a woman is 
approached and adequately compensated to 
feed a suckling infant. Here the consideration is 
humane to feed the body, the milk having the 



481 



secondary importance as compared to the child. 
It is like the thread and the tailor or the ink and 
the writer vis a vis the instrument and its agent. 

The third condition is that the assignment to 
perform a job should be allocated to a suitable 
person fit to discharge its obligations. As such, it 
is not proper to depute a weak aged person to 
carry heavy wieghts or for that matter to ask a 
woman in her periods to perform the job of 
cleaning a mosque. Such 'Ijara' will be invalid 
('Haram'). 

Since the principle is of the duty assigned being 
suitable, it is not proper to 

A. Give 'Ijara' for pricking the ears of a person. 

B. To have a person paid 'Ijara' for massaging 
some body. 

C. To ask a tailor to stitch gorgeous caps of 
fancy work of 'Atlas' (Expensive, rare silk) 
or prepare silk clothes for men. Doing so is 
undesirable from the point of view of 
'Shariat'. 

D. To have someone perform or teach rope 
tricks or frivolous jugglery is also forbidden 
such 'Ijara' would be 'Haram'. 

E. Similarly it is ('Haram') undesirable and 
forbidden to pay Ijara to mimics. Singers, 
professional mourners and paid poets etc. 

F. A 'Qazi' (Judge) is paid 'Ijara' for his whole 
time prescribed duties to do so but he can 
not be paid extra 'Ijara' of any kind for 



482 

writing lengthy judgements involving in 
what may be termed as extra work, as it is 
part of his professional duties. 

G. A 'Qazi' who does not dispense impartial 
justice should not be appointed. His 'Ijara' 
will be 'Haram' while the 'Ijara' of a ('Vakil') 
pleader would be ('Halal') valid. 

H. Similarly a ('Salice') mediator of merit who 
has to spend a lot of time to bring things to 
normalcy between two parties has the right 
to be paid ijara' compatable with his efforts 
and the time consumed in doing so and not 
more. It is not fair on his part to exploit the 
situation and as sometimes happens, take 
'Ijara' from both parties. It is better that 
instead he acts as a conciliator between 
them without an axe to grind. The mediator 
has to be impartial and above board. 
Harassment of no one should be involved. 

The mediation should be on the basis of charity 
for all and malice towards none. 'Ijara' accepted 
without a clean hand in such matters in 
'Haram'. Unfair manipulation, trickery, 
blackmailing, prejudicial play acting is as bad as 
an anathema for a ('Salice') mediator. As a 
matter of fact such a person should be a solace 
giver, a pain reliever like a 'Ministering angel' 
for both the parties. Their happiness should be 
a matter of "primary happiness to him. 

The ('Ijara') remuneration for the following Is 
'Haram' according to 'Shariat'. 



483 



A. To side with, aid and abet a tyrant. 

B. To suppress evidence willfully. 

C. To give a wrong statement as a witness or 
as a paid agent. 

t 

(iv) According 'Shariat' to accept 'Ijara' for the 
following is not allowed. 

A. To pay a 'Mujahid' 

B. To pay a 'Qazf for giving a just decision or 
to 'pay' a witness to tell the truth. 

C. To pay somebody to say prayers on his 
behalf or to pay somebody on normal 
conditions to keep a ('Roza') fast for him. 

There is no ('Niyabat') permission in lieu, to 
perform such acts. However, it is permissible to 
perform Haj for somebody under prescribed 
extenuating circumstances. Though 'Farze 
Kifaya' (Duties assigned) there is no harm in 
paying 'Ijara' to the following, for their labours. 

A. A person who bathes a dead body. 

B. Carriers of a dead body to the burial place 

C. The grave digger (The undertaker) 

(v) The fifth condition is that if an animal is hired to 
carry weight, there should be no cruelty to the 
animal. It is therefore essential that before doig 
so, the owner of the animal should know the 
working conditions, the weight for the distance 



484 



the animal will be required to carry, within the 
working hours. If a piece of land is given on 
contract for tilling, both parties should know 
what is going to be grown therein, to forestall 
coming days misunderstandings and feuds. 

The sixth condition is that if a third party is 
involved in a transaction his 'Ijara' should be 
stipulated and clearly foreseen. Vague, arbitrary 
terms should be avoided. 

(I) For instance, to inform the hired workers' 
on a farm that if the harvest is good you 
will get this much etc. The workers on the 
field should either be informed of their 
'Ijara' on fair and acceptable basis or be 
intimated that they will get-say half or one 
third of the share of the produce. 

(II) Not only the Ijara should be fair and well- 
defined but there should not be any 
stringent conditions attatched to it. For 
instance to stipulate that 'if you want to 
cultivate this land you can not buy the 
seeds from such and such person or 
shopkeepter etc. is wrong. In case of 
undertaking a project, the investment being 
equal, the terms of agreement should also 
be equitable and applicable to each 
participant on uniform basis. Just because a 
person or party is strong and more 
influential than the others it has no right to 
sway the others to their point of view 
contrary to the basic terms of the 
agreement. 



485 



(vii) The seventh element is that whereas the profit 
sharing between the parties in partnership 
should be at the ratio of their investment, incase 
one of the partners is a managing partner and 
others are not, the additional remuneration 
eligible to him should be decided right at the 
beginning. However care should be taken that:- 

(i) The owner of the land does not say to the 
workers that 'treat yourselves as partners in 
the produce' and later if the harvest is not 
good they may be left hand to mouth, for 
no wanton fault of theirs. 

(ii) Or to begin an undertaking on vague 
understanding that 'I have only this much, 
you two invest whatever you have. We will 
look into things and settle accounts later 
etc'. 

(iii) The third undesirable partnership is the one 
between an investor and a powerful person 
or party. In such association the later is 
always liable to upset the balance resulting 
in untoward situations. Hence joint ventures 
should be avoided. 



Most of the important foregoing points have 
been discussed so far. In any case in other 
contigencies, it should be kept in mind that the trade 
and commerce should not be against the dictates of 
'Shariat', or to extort money at any cost. Business 
should be conducted on fair basis and 'Haram' should 
be forestalled at all costs. 



486 

JUSTICE AND FAIRPLAY IN ONE'S DEALINGS 

We have hitherto discussed the status of things 
being according to the 'Shariat'. It is possible that in 
certain matters the decision may be given in favour of 
a person based on circumstantial evidence but in actual 
fact he may be a defaulter before Allah, which hurts 
the faithful grievouly some times. Hence justice and 
fairplay in his dealings with others is of paramount 
importance to a Muslim. Broadly speaking such 
matters may be of two kinds viz common and special. 
Hence to be guarding of them is essential. 

For instance, hoarding of goods for profiteering 
is a sickness of thought ('Fikr') and very treacherous. 
So much so that the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said that "a person 
who hoards food grains for more than forty days will 
not be able to pay its Kaffara (Penance) even if he 
gives all of it in charity after he repents and relents. He 
would remain disgusted with himself and Allah will be 
unhappy with him. In comparison a person who takes 
his food grains to an other city and sells it at the rates 
prevalent there will have acted as if he has given a 
'SadqaV According to a 'Rivayat' it is tantamount to 
his having done good equivalent to have set a slave, 
free. According to Hazrat Ali Karamal Wajah (Allah be 
pleased with him) the heart of such a person will 
become black on account of his perfidy and that such 
'Mai' should be set afire. 

The people of the olden times were so pious 
and afraid of Allah's Wrath on such evil deeds that 
once a merchant sent a consignment toll of food grains 



487 



for sale in Basra. When his agent ('Valil') reached there 
he found that if he sold the goods there, they would 
get very little profit for them. Therefore he waited for a 
week and sold the grain at double the price and 
informed the owner of the extraordinary profit made 
by him. The owner read his letter with deep anguish. 
He wrote back to him immediately and said "I would 
have been much contented with whatever meagre 
profit we may have made. In that case at least our 
('Deen') Faith would have been saved. By your greed 

and intention of profiteering, a curse may fall on us. 
Hence hurry up and give all the 'Mai' earned by you in 
charity. We may yet not be able to earn a saving 
grace." 

The fear of punishment in such profiteering was 
due to the hardship that the people would have been 
put to, due to the exhorbitant price of wheat which is 
an essential commodity. It would have been sheer 
exploitation of the people for momentary personal 
gains. The very poor may have had to go without food 
or to take less of it on account of the greed of the 
trader. It is like putting a price on water without which 
noone can exist. It is a grave sin to do so. 

There is however no ban or bar on a cultivator 
to sell his food grains when ever he may want to do so 
but if he delays the sale of his produce to get an 
exhorbitant price for it then his earning will be based 
on avarice, hence 'Haram'. To hoard food grains and 
things of daily use, create their artificial scarcity and 
then exploit the inevitable need for them, thereby 
increase the price of goods and tax the faithf jl for 
selfish lust for money is equivalent to make the trading 



488 



in 'Anaj' (Food grains) and other essential articles of 
life the some as trading in the 'Kafan' (The burrial cloth 
for the dead) of the people. It tantamounts to make 
the painful life of the survivors equivalent to the agony 
of death. No wonder two vocations i.e. the of the 
butcher and goldsmith are looked askance at by the 
poor. The butcher gets hard hearted and the goldsmith 
is concerned with the ornamentation and the luxury of 
life. The poor and needy can ill afford them both. 

The second vicious thing is passing a bad coin. 
It is like an epidemic germ. When the man realises that 
unknowingly he has received a bad coin, he feels hurt 
and in turn is tempted to pass it on to some other 
person surreptitiously. Thus the menace spreads, 
tarring the conscience of many. Treachery and 
deception gets abroad. Good men start behaving in an 
ungainly manner. A vicious circle is formed. The man 
who spreads the evil has therefore to bear the onus of 
the menace that he has spread. The age old saying 
that on honestly earned dirham in the nest egg, is 
better than a hundred stolen dirhams, for the dirham 
earned with the sweat of ones brow serves as his life 
blood but the stolen dirhams live to cast a standing 
curse on him even after his death. He has not only to 
pay for this dastardly act dearly in the hereafter but 
also people abominate him as a low thief, when they 
think and talk of him after his demise what a 
disgraceful legacy to leave behind, what a calumny to 
carry in the hereafter. 

When a person sees a bad coin he had better 
cast it into a well so that the scourge is not spread. He 
should also not give it to somebody saying that it is a 



489 



bad coin, lest Allah forbid the man may be tempted. 
One should also try to learn to decipher between a 
good and a bad coin so that he may not suffer a loss. 
Last of all, if a person knowingly accepts a bad coin 
quietly in order to check its going into circulation, 
earns ('Sawab') a reward inconceivably far far more 
than the value of the coin. The Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) has siad: 

"May Allah bless him, who acts well to 
give ease to a transaction." 

(iv) The fourth thing to bear in mind is that a gold 
or silver coin can not be considered counterfeit 
because of its contents of gold or silver. Thus, if 
such a coin be damaged, badly tarnished or 
awry in any way, it should not be cast into a 
well. It should be given to such a person who 
may not misuse it. He should be informed of its 
defect. To quietly pass it on to someone 
amongst many coins or when the taker is in a 
hurry, is deceiving him. All the same, to wilfully 
give it to a dishonest person is tantamount to 
selling grapes to a person who will make liqour 
out of it or it is like selling weapons to a known 
robber, which is ('Haram') forbidden in Islam. It 
is the belief of all faithfuls that to be a 
trustworthy ('Amanatdar') trader is as good as 
being a devoted worshipper of Allah in his 
cause. 



490 



Furthermore in the man's dealings with others 
there should be nothing miserly spiteful or based on 
egotism. It is equivalent to ('Zulm') cruelty to others. 
Indeed, the faith of that person is lacking or shattered 
who likes for others when he does not like for himself. 

Also, there should be no deceit in selling. The 
merchandise being sold should not be overpraised. 
Such qualities should not be attributed to a thing which 
may not be present in it. If the thing being sold is really 
praiseworthy, the buyer has not to be told. He divines 
it automatically. 

A : 3 ) ^ £»J tf) 'jf u 

Not a word he utters but by him is a ready 
observer. (50 : 18) 

On the Day of Judgement the seller will have to 
account for the lies he has told to the buyer to induce 
him to purchase his merchandise. It is a great sin to do 
so. Even if a person, swears rightly by Allah for trivial 
things, he is liable for it, as to do so is to treat the 
Great Name of Allah lightly. That is why it is clearly 
stated in the 'Hadith* that the traders who resort to 
swearing by Allah by saying 'Wallah' repeatedly and 
the technicians who cover up their delays by such 
conduct in routine, will not find themselves near the 
proximity of Allah's Mercy on the Day of Judgement. 

Hazrat Younus Bin Ubaidullah (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) was a silk merchant. One day when he took out 
a bundle of silken cloth out to display it. His servant 
exclaimed "how gorgeous. I wish I am given such 



491 



clothes to wear on the Day of the Judgement." Since it 
was self-praise before others Hazrat Younus 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) stopped trading in silk from the 
day. 

The next important point is that in case there is 
any defect in the thing being sold, it should be 
intimated to the buyer straight away. As such, not to 
do so and want only cheat the buyer by showing him 
articles being sold in the dark, or by showing the good 
pieces of a bad lot to the customer is 'Haram'. 

One day the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) happened to pass by a grain 
merchant. He put his hand into a mound of grain and 
found that the particles of it underneath were wet? On 
enquiry from him the grain merchant humbly replied 
that it had got drenched in rain. Thereupon the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upbn him) 
told him Then, why was it not sorted out and added. 

"A deceiver is not one amongst us." 

It is related that once a person sold a camel to 
somebody for three hundred dirhams. Hazrat Vaila Bin 
Alasqa (Rahmatullah Alaih) was standing there. After a 
while Hazrat Vaila ran after the buyer and informed 
him that there was some defect in one of the legs of 
the camel. Thereupon the seller had to cancel the sale 
and return him the three hundred dirhams. He was 
annoyed with Hazrat Vaila and told him "Why did you 



492 



spoil my bargain?" Hazrat Vaila replied, "It was more 
for your good than his that I did so, as, the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has taught us to not to do so. If I had not intervened 
you would have lost the grace of Allah for petty 
pennies. You had better repent now and relent from 
doig so in future, even now." 

Hence it is better for the buyer to take care at 
the time of buying an article that it is not defective. 
Yet, if he is duped he should bring it to the notice of 
the seller as soon as possible. But if the shopkeeper or 
the seller is adamant to make amends, he should bear 
the loss with fortitude, as Allah Himself takes 
cognizance of such things. What is more, if he has 
made a purchase to sell it in turn as a retailer, he 
should make sure that his buyers do not suffer likewise 
in turn. 

A merchant worth his salt should know the 
value of eiman') Faith in Allah. The ('Rizq') livelihood 
is in the hands of Allah. He increases it or decreases it 
as He wills. All that man can do is to be hard working 
and honest. Deception and dishonesty never pay. On 
the contrary it takes away all the 'Barkat' i.e. the virtue 
and bountifulness out of the transaction and from his 
livelihood too. It is not uncommon that such 
illegitimate earnings, no matter how collosal they may 
be, are suddenly taken away from such defaulters by 
sudden, unforeseen calamaties. Evil begets evil. One 
should learn a lesson from the anecdote about a 
person who used to mix water in the milk and thought 
he was prospering till one night when all his cattle was 



i 

493 

carried away and lost for good in an unexpected 
deluge of heavy rain and flood. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said, "that no sooner dishonesty 
creeps into a thing than its blessings start petering out." 
'Barkat' is a blessing. It brings happy augury, a sense 
of blessed prosperity and well being. It is better to be 
modestly but honestly well off than fabulously rich by 
deceitful and devious means. To be honest and trust 
worthy is the main thing. No body wants to have 
anything to - do with a person who is not reliable. 
Everybody shuns him for this trait. 

Why should man then not ponder over the fact 
realistically that at the maximum his life span can be a 
hundred years and the 'Akhirat', the hereafter is 
interminable. Hence, why waste away the life's work 
for the momentary lust of gold and silver for it. The 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) has said that "the only protection for man in this 
world is the 'Kalima' (veritable statement) of 'I^a ilaha 
Ilullah' (There is no Allah but Allah)." Therefore, all 
things that are contrary to Allah's dictates are cursed. 
Thus, to invoke Allah's wrath by such treacherous 
means wantonly is neglect of the worst order. 

Somebody asked the opinion of Hazrat Imam 
Ahmad bin Hunbal (Rahmatullah Alaih) about darning 
of clothes. He said that normally it is not a desirable 
act, as, a certain amount of deception is involved in it 
but if a person does it for himself then there is no 
harm in it. However if a patch is mended to deceive 
others or if the weightment or measurement is wrongly 



9 

494 

made to the detriment of another person, it is very 
evil. The Almighty Allah has also ordained that:- 

Woe to the stinters.... (83 . ij 

Hence to weigh less or measure less is devastating. It is 
cursed to do so. In the olden days people used to give 
a little extra and try and take a little less in their 
dealings with others. They used to say that 'it is a fine 
veil of protection between us and the Hell, lest we 
should have inadvertently wieghed or measured less at 

the time of giving and taken more at v the time of 
receipt.' 

That person is indeed very foolish who casts 
away ('Jannat') the Paradise which is larger than the 
Heaven and Earth put together in vice an infitisimal 
gain in this world. That is why when ever the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
used to buy anything he used to say, "Weigh 
according to its price. And when you weigh for others 
always tilt the scale a little in favour of the buyer. It is 
more graceful to do so." 



Once Hazrat Fazal (Rahmatullah Alaih) saw his 
son weighing dinars to give them to somebody. He 
also saw that while doing so he was also continuously 
cleaning away the rust from the scale. He was very 
pleased at it and remarked, "this act of yours is better 
than performing two *Hajs' and two *Umras\ Your 
spirit is commendable." 



495 



The following acts were considered deplorable 
by the elite of the Faith, oHhe olden days. 

(i) To receive goods on one scale and give them 
on other. 

(ii) To measure the cloth loosely while taking it and 
stretch it tight while giving it. 

(iii) To pile the meat with such bones which are 
uncommon and undesirable in normal course. 

(iv) To give food grains with dust particles and other 
odds and ends in it. 

(v) To sell spurious goods. 

How would a person who does any of these 
things feel if others do the same to him? Surely, a 
faithful who loves his brethren and feels for them 
would never behave in such a way with them. Hence, 
the secret lies in treating others the way one would like 
to be treated by others. Allah has ordained:- 

u-aA» dLj Js- J15 c l»i ji j ui p£±f o\ j 

And there is hone among you, but he shall 
arrive* there; it is a thing definite, and 
decreed by thy Lord. • (19:71) 

In short, there is no one who may not have to 
overpass the Hell. However, it is the pious and 
trustworthy who would be able to evade it. 

The fourth essential thing is to charge fair and 



496 



correct rate of the commodity being sold. The question 
of greed comes again. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said, "No 
incoming merchant has the right to surreptitiously leave 
his caravan to reach the destination city sooner than 
others, conceal its prevalent rate from others and buy 
things at cheaper price. In such an eventuality the 
market traders have the right to cancel the deal. The 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) has also warned against malpractices of following 
nature by the greedy merchant. 

(i) That a person should bring his goods into the 
market and try to sell them cheaper than the 
others but on the asking of an other trader 
hoard his stocks for sale at a higher rate later. 

(ii) Or, if he deceives an innocent buyer who may 
have faith in him and sell his goods to him at a 
higher price than prevalent in the market. He 
should either make good his loss or the 
transaction should be repealed. Also it is not 
proper to raise the price of goods in the market 
in collusion with others to fleece the buyers. It is 
'Haram' to do so. 

Likewise, it is narrated that once the servant of 
a merchant informed him that the sugar cane crop had 
been severely affected by draught that year. He got 
tempted and stocked a large quantity of sugar. 
Consequently he made a huge profit of thirty thousand 
dinars. Later his conscience started pricking him that 
he had deceived a brother Muslim and exploited the 
situation. Therefore, he went to the, trader and 



497 



succeeded in returning the entire amount to him, to 
protect his 'Akhirat', with great difficulty. Summon 
bonum; hoarding of goods for profiteering, exploitation 
of emergencies, increasing the price of commodities by 
collusion of merchants in the market, to build artificial 
shortages to amass money and selling commodities at 
higher rates arbitrarily, supplying spurious goods, 
under weighing, under cutting etc. thus burdening the 
faithful and making their lives miserable is treacherous 
and 'Haram' Greed and deceit are its main causes. 

BEING KIND AND CONSIDERATE IN ONE'S 
DEALINGS WITH OTHERS 

Allah has not only ordained that people should 
be just and fair to each other but has also proclaimed 
that they should also be kind and considerate in their 
dealings. 

Allah enjoins justice, good-doing.... 

(16 : 90) 

We have so far discussed the necessity of being 
just and fair in our dealings with each other. We are 
now broaching the other important aspect of being 
kind and considerate also, as ordained by Allah. 

. (01: ^VVt) 'J^J\ jfl^J <lJt c-^j bj 

Surely Allah's Mercy is near the good- 
doers. (7 : 56) 



498 



By being just and fair, the man serves his Faith by 
obeying its stipulations and protects himself from 
punishment by Allah. He also saves himself from being 
called a black guard and a miscreant but the true 
rectitude lies in doing something more than that by 
earning on extra bonus by being kind and considerate 
to his brethern in Faith and fellow beings. Such 
behaviour lends a lustre to man's conduct. Surely, an 
upright person who is more human and compassionate 
towards those that he comes in contact with is head 
and shoulders above those who are merely ngidly 
righteous. Allah likes the 'Muhsineen' i.e. such kindred 
souls. Such behaviour also wins the hearts of the 
people. 

There are six principal features of doing so. 

1 Firstly it is more becoming to try and not 
charge a profit to a person who may not be 
able to afford a thing but may be going in for it 
perforce majeur in a state of distress 

Hazrat Sirri Saqti (Rahmatullah Alaih) an 
esteemed saint of his time was a shopkeeper. 
He had decided not to take more than five 
percent profit on his sales. Once he bought 
almonds worth sixty dinars. As chance would 
have it, suddenly the price of these almonds 
increased to ninety dinars. A broker came to 
him He was prepared to pay him on the 
current rate but he did not condescend to 
increase the price and also did not sell the 
almonds to him lest, he should in turn sell them 
at exhorbitant profit. This is what is meant by 



499 



'Ihsan' i.e. doing good to others out of noble 
motives. Such lofty conduct involves a certain 
element of sacrifice which was not lacking in 
Hazrat Sirri S'aqte (Rahmatullah Alaih). 

Similarly, an other venerated saint of his day 
Hazrat Muhammad Bin Almunkadar 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) also earned his living as a 
cloth seller. He had many wraps (Thans') of 
cloth in his shop, some costing five dinars and 
some costing ten dinars. One day when he was 
not in his shop, his servant inadvertently sold a 
'Than' costing five dinars for ten to a ('Badwi') 
negroid gentleman. When Hazrat Almunkadar 
came to know of this mistake he was much 
worried and started searching for the 'Badawi to 
make amends as soon as possible. Ultimately he 
found him, explained the position to him and 
offered to pay remaining five dinars to him. The 
'Badawi' declined to take the money and said, 
"You need not worry. I don't want this money. 
The cloth is good. I am happy with the 
transaction." But Hazrat Almunkadar 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) did not demur from his 
stand and insistingly replied, "Forgive me. No. I 
can not do so. It is 'Haram'. I do not consider 
that good for me which is not good for my 
brother." Thereupon the Badawi took the five 
dinars from him. Later, when he came to know 
who he was, he was so impressed by him that 
he said, "what an upright person he is. It is 
such people who should be asked to pray for 
rain, in the days of famine." Indeed, our 
ancestors of the olden days were such. They 



500 

were kind and considerate in their dealings. 
Money never mattered more than the man to 
them. 

« 

Hazrat Ali (Allah be pleased with him) used to 
go round the bazaars of 'Koofa' and used to 
say, "Listen to me my friends! Don't discard 
taking small profits on your good, lest you shuld 
dispel chances of taking greater profits from 
Allah, in return." 

One day somebody asked the reason of Hazrat 
Abdur Rehman Bin Aufs (Allah be pleased with 
him) prosperity in business. He replied, "I have 
never been greedy. Taking small profits has 
always attracted me. If ever someone asked me 
for one animal I gave it away as happily as I 
sold a thousand camels. There too I did not 
mind giving them at cost price. Yet I got one 
dirham for each one of their nooses and 
thereby made one thousand and dirhams which 
was not bad. 

The second propriety lies in wantonly buying 
the goods from the not so well off, poor or 
destitute at the higher price than its value, like 
the cotton wool from a widow or an orphan. 
Doing good by stealth in this manner verges on 
the man following in the footsteps of the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him). 



"My Allah be Merciful to a person who 



501 



causes ease in transaction of sale and 
purchase." 

As for charging more to a rich person, it has no 
'Sawab', nor it is in any way commendable. It is 
however much better charge the poor less and 
to bargain assiduously with the rich while buying 
things from them. Hazrat Imam Hassan and 
Hussain Alaihis Salam (Allah be pleased with 
them) used to do so. People were surprised and 
asked them. "Both of you give thousands of 
dirhams in charity every day, how come yet we 
see you disputing with the rich shopkeepers for 
price decrease?" They replied, "These 
merchants are rich. They can afford to reduce 
the rate. As for the things we buy from them, 
they also go to the poor." . 

Much good accrues in such dealings by charging 
less on general principle, specially to the poor, 
by restraining a bad coin from going into 
circulation and finally by giving sometime to the 
poor and deserving to honour their obligations. 
These virtues are inkeeping with obedience to 
the saying of the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) to this effect. 
The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has also said that, "Allah does 
not like those who are not merciful towards the 
destitutes and poor. It is cruel to oppress them. 
Therefore, the shopkeeper should not make 
their lives further miserable by plundering them 
for their debts. They deserve to be given more 
time to pay back their dues and live with 



502 



honour. Allah is kindly disposed to those who 
are kind and charitable to them. 

It is in the 'Hadith' that the merchants who used 
to harass the people in distress to pay back their 
dues would be taken to task for their ('Zulm') 
cruelty to them. They knew well that these 
people were in a state of destitution. Hence 
why did these traders pester them? These 
moneyed merchants will then shiver in fear and 
will advance the plea that they had directed 
their servants not to worry the poor. They were 
sorry. However Allah the Merciful will pardon 
there looking at their plight, not dissimilar to 
that of those who had bowed before them 
seeking mercy which they had not granted to 
them at that time. 

It is in the 'Hadith' that if a person gives a loan 
to somebody for a stipulated period, every day 
that passes after that during this span of time is 
equivalent to 'Sadqa', for his charitable act. 
Thereafter every day that passes during which 
he sympathetically waits for him, is tantamount 
to his having given the entire amount loaned, as 
'Sadaqa'. For the same reason the people of the 
olden days did not want their loan to be paid 
back to them. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has also said that, "I have seen 
an inscription on the door of 'Jannat' (Paradise) 
that each dirham given in 'Sadaqa' (charity) is 
equivalent to ten dirhams given, as its reward 
whereas every dirham given on loan to relieve 



503 



the suffering of a person is as good as eighteen 
dirhams given, in its 'Ajr' (Recompense and 
reward by Allah). Most likely it is so, as only a 
needy person takes a loan, whereas a 'Sadaqa' 
can go to the hands of man who may not be in 
distress. 

The fourth thing is that if a man is in debt, he 
should make haste to return it, so that he is not 
reminded of it. He should go to the creditors 
place and return him the loan given in good 
coins personally, and not call him at his house 
• to take back the amount. 

It is in the 'Hadith' that a person who takes a 
loan with the intention of returning it as soon as 
possible is blessed. Allah the Mercifuldesignates 
angels to take care of him. They pray for him. 
It should be understood that:- 

A. The loan should be paid back as soon as 
possible with gratitude otherwise he will be 
seriously liable to Allah for wanton default. 

B. If possible even if he has to sell some asset 
to honour his obligation, the debtor should 
not delay repayment. Any lapse in 
payment, if he can, any let up or wanton 
delay will mean that he is an ungrateful and 
untrustworthy person. The feelings of his 
benefactor will be hurt. He will become a 
malefactor before man and Allah. 

Fifthly, it is better to withdraw from the contract 
or a transaction, if the party of the second part 



504 



may not see eye to eye with him in a joint 
venture, as, usually such an association does 
not last long and ends up in unpleasantness 
between brethren in Faith. That is why the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) has said that "if a person terminates such a 
partnership acting as if he had never entered 
into it, to forestall a bone of discord between 
the faithful, Allah will likewise condone his 
minor sins as if he had never committed them." 

(vi) It is well-worth reiterating that it is of redeeming 
virtue to help a brother Muslim in straits by 
giving him timely financial assistance gracefully 
with the intention of not taking it back from 
him. 

In the olden days people were generous and 
used to maintain two lists. One of these used to have 
scribbled, illegible names of the 'Fuqara' in it, so that 
they may- not worry about the loan given to them if 
they die, but the better ones of these Allah fearing 
people never maintained any such record for the love 
and fear of Allah. If anyone of the creditors ever 
returned the loan with ease they use to keep it, 
otherwise they used to cast the thought of getting it 
back from them out of their mind right from the 
beginning. If one discards even one dinar for the sake 
of 'Deen' (Faith) he is a ('Deendar') Faithful person. 

'SHAFQAT: BENEVOLENCE TOWARDS 
('DEEN') FAITH IN MATTERS OF THIS WORLD 

The world is very engaging and the man is 
weak. Therefore it is of the utmost importance that the 



505 



man does not forget that this world is merely a 
transitory phase in his existence. He should not forget 
his final destination viz his 'Akhirat', the Hereafter, for, 
man is in temporary sojourn in this life to collect the 
maximum merchandise of good quality to stand him in 
good stead when he reaches his goal. Hence to get 
absorbed in frivolous playful activities in transit is to 
mar the very purpose for which he had undertaken 
this arduous journey. What will help the man in the 
'Akhirat' is the vases of gold accumulated enroute and 
not the vases of clay which have no value and tend to 
break easily. For this purpose seven things are of the 
essence. 

I. The first thing is that th man should keep on 
assessing his progress. Every morning he should 
start with the resolve to do good deeds. 

(i) That he will go out to the bazaar to earn an 
honest living for himself and his dependents 
so that he may have enough to go by 
without greed and that he may not have to 
extend his hands towards anyone to sustain 
his family. 

(ii) That, in doing so he will behave sedately 
with his fellow beings giving them no cause 
for complaint. 

(iii) That he will so manage his affairs that he 
will also be able to attend to his prayers and 
worship whole heartedly, as much more as 
possible. 

II. The man should likewise not omit to 'remember 



506 



that in this complex life, he is like a small cog in 
an intricate mechanism to make human 
existence possible and easy. He should realise 
that there are many professionals like the 
farmer, the blacksmith, the baker, the weaver 
etc. who conjoin to perform different jobs for 
him to provide him many things of essential 
nature, conveniently. It should be his duty to 
serve humanity selflessly in the same way in his 
vocation. This fair give and take between 
Muslims is a 'Farze Kifaya (An essential, primary 
duty) . 

So, if service be his motto, he will never do 
anything that is against, the 'Shariat' (Code of 
conduct for Muslims) . He will not perform jobs 
that are not ('Mubah') permissible. He will assert 
the good and countermand the evil. He will not 
enter into 'Makrooh Tijarat' i.e. the forbidden 
vocations like weaving the 'Atlas silk' for men 
and casting gold jewellery of expensive design 
for them. He will also protect himself from 
entering into acts involving usury. It is strictly 
forbidden and is 'Haram'. 

There are many trades for him. If he can help 
it, he may avoid the vocation of dealing in hides 
and skins or he may not undertake to become a 
sweeper, as, such jobs tend to be dirtying and 
uncongenial. The main thing is to gauge* his 
capabilities and if possible, he can become a 
water-carrier which is a desirable assignment. 
He can even become a shopkeeper or a general 
merchant which is a highly cherished means of 



507 



earning the livelihood. He may even become a 
('Musllim') teacher. Each has its merits and 
demerits but it is the spirit behind the 
undertaking that matters. 

The third thing is that th man should not prefer 
the bazaar of ('Dunya') this world to the 'Bazaar' 
(The passage way: A market place) of the 
'Akhirat'. Allah has ordained. 

<rv : j>Jt) - jS"? *j* y Oj Vfa'pida d 

Neither commerce nor trafficking diverts 
from the remembrance of God.... (24 : 37) 

The 'Bazaar' of the 'Akhirat' is in 'Masajid' 
(Plural of Mosque). Hazrat Umar (Allah be 
pleased with him) used to exhort people, 
specially the merchants to segregate their time 
for trade and the worship of Allah. The basic 
idea' is pronounced. Our ancestors used to do 
so and they were worthy Muslims. The 
mosques used to be congregated most of the 
time, during their days. 

It is in the 'Hadith' that when the angels carry 
the 'Aamal Naama' (The celestial record book of 
man's performance of good and bad deeds 
done) of a person to Allah, He asks them about 
the performance of each person during the day 
and night. The angels humbly narrate the good 
and bad deeds done by them. f When they say 
that 'we left such and such person saying his 
prayers. Allah says to them, "Remain a witness 



508 



that I have pardoned him." 

First things first, it is therefore essential for each 
person to stop doing whatever he is doing when 
he hears the 'Azaan' i.e. the call for prayers. 
This was the heart warning practice in the olden 
days. It was a rare sight. The iron smith used to 
put down the hammer, the leather jacketter his 
sewing needle, in humble obedience. 

A moment lost can never be regained. Time 
and tide wait for none. As such even when a 
Muslim is in the bazaar his heart and tongue 
should not be unmindful of the rememberance 
of Allah. Indeed, a person abreast of the ('Zikr') 
remembrance of Allah amongst the negligent is 
like the live green tree amongst dry foliage, like 
the alive among the dead or like a 'Ghazi' 
(Brave fighter for the Faith) compared to the 
cowardly absconders, the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) has said 
that ** 'Ajjv equivalent to one thousand good 
deeds done will be awarded to him two times 
over if a man recites the following at the time of 
going to 'bazaar'." 

JJ j 'd&s *j 2J jj^A.d j tilt d> i), J 

- y.A t [P» J* > j 

There is no god save Allah. He is the One 
and the Only. There is no partner unto 
Him. To Him belongs dominion and to 
Him belongs all praise. He gives life and 



509 



He gives death. He is All-Alive and death 
can't approach Him. In His Hand is all 
good. And He is Able to do all things. 

Hazrat Junaid Baghdadi (Rahmatullah Alaih) an 
eminent saint of his time surprised the listners 
when he said that the saints and soofia (Pious 
persons of staunch faith. Pursuants of the 
cognizance of Allah) do so without fail. He said 
he knows a man who is in the bazaar and says 
over three hundred rosaries a day, while there. 
Obviously there is a marked difference between 
such a person and a person who is in the 
mosque but his heart is still in his shop and in 
its sales. The bliss reigns the soul of the former 
and the later has nothing but regret and 
remorse for him all the time. 

The fifth care to adopt is to overcome the world 
avarice i.e. to not to be the. first to go to the 
bazaar and be the last to return from there. It is 
the oft-repeated saying of Hazrat Mu'az Bin 
Jabal (Rahmatullah Alaih) that 'Zalnaboor' the 
son of 'Iblees' (Satan: The fallen angel) roams 
around the streets of the 'bazaar' all the time 
stealthily misguiding people; tempting them with 
greed, exhorting them to swear constantly and 
wrongly, to tell lies and deceive people. He is 
the constant companion of such a spell bound 
person who comes to the market place the first 
of all and leaves the place the last of all. 

It is in the 'Hadith' that as such the worst place 
where a man's 'Eeman' (Faith) is tested the 
most is the 'bazaar' and the worst man in it is he 



510 

who comes there the foremost and is the last to 

go. 

Hence, the shopkeepers should not go to the 
'bazaar' until they have said their prayers and 
participated in faithful discourse. And as soon as 
they have earned enough to lead a normal life 
they should close shop and go to the mosque. 
If a man remains engrossed in this life only, he 
will not be able to make any excuses of 
shortage of time to pray in the next. 

Hazrat Bin Salma (Rahmatullah Alaih) the 
worthy teacher of Hazrat Imam Abu Hanifa 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) used to come back from 
the bazaar along with his ('Gathri') bag of goods 
as soon as he used to make two 'Habbas' (small 
coins) of profit. 

One day Ibrahim Bin Bashshar (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) informed Hazrat Ibrahim Addham 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) that "Today, I am going to 
do the job of cleaning the dust." Hazrat Ibrahim 
Addham remarked, "you are likely to be 
occupied till late in the evening there. Are you 
aware that you are going in search of such a job 
whereas death is in search of you. You will not 
be able to get rid of it whereas death will not 
spare you. Perhaps you are not aware of a 
greedy person remaining unattained and a 
lethargic person being fruitful, at times. You 
have one 'Dang Baqqal' (Lowest coin prevalent) 
left with you. Why don't you remain contented 
with it?" 



511 



There were people in the olden days who never 
worked for more than two days in the 'bazaar'. 
Some of them used to come back by 'Zuhr' time 
and some by 'Asr'. Their only objective used to 
be to earn enough to go by and spend the 
remaining time in the 'Yad' (Remembrance) of 
Allah. Usually the 'Masjid' (The mosque) used 
to be their forte. 

The sixth thing is that the man should protect 
himself from suspect 'Mai', (Money or goods) 
since, to take 'Haram' is to plunge into hell. On 
general principle it is better to avoid whatever 
may be suspected but not due to any sense of 
pride in one's piety. Rather than ask a 'Mufti' it 
is better to probe one's conscience if one has a 
cognizant soul. In any case whatever is repulsive 
should be overruled. 

One should also make sure to never have 
anything to do with a 'Zalim' i.e. a cruel person 
or his associates. It is criminal to buy anything 
from them or to sell anything to them. Also, to 
directly or indirectly aid and help them is 
equally bad. 

There was a time when people were ignorant. 
They used to deal with everyone. This brought 
the right and the wrong at par. But they used to 
repent after suffering at the hands of some of 
these evil people. Then the discernment 
prevailed and people started being cautious in 
their affaris and started forestalling the black, 
preferring the white and unhurtful. This is what 



512 



our memorable ancestors used to do. Again, 
things have started changing. The 'Neem Alims' 
(Pseudo scholars), 'Naqise Deen' (The 
incompetent of Faith) and so called sages have 
started saying that there is no harm in anything- 
all things are equal, whereas most of them are 
'HararrT. Consequently, things have become 
difficult. Caution has been cast to the wind and 
people have become unrestrained and daring. It 
is very unfortunate. We will go into the matter 
of 'Halal-o-Haram' more deeply in the ensuing 
chapters. 

(VII) Last but not the least, the man should not 
forget that on the Day of Judgement he will 
have to stand face to face with the people he 
has dealt with and in case he has not been a 
man of his word and square with them, he will 
cut a very sorry figure for his infidelity. As such, 
the sooner one takes stock of things and sets 
himself right, the better it is for him. 

One 'Buzurg' (A senior person of standing) had 
a dream one night. He saw a merchant whom 
he knew when he was alive. He asked the 
merchant of his status. He replied. -"About fifty 
thousand case files were placed before me. 
These documents pertained to my dealings and 
t transactions with others. Not an iota was 
missing. Luckily, most of it was in order. Yet, I 

felt ashamed, for my minor mistakes. I am all 
right." 

Nobody would be spared , on the Day of 



513 



Judgement. There can be no relief for a person 
unless the aggrieved person or party forgives 
him. The man has to account for it, even if it be 
a grain misappropriated. Treachery will never be 
forgiven. It is a heinous crime. 

That is why we repeatedly think of and talk 
about our ancestors. They were very particular 
about such things and rightly so. They were 
simple and pious people. They had the fear of 
Allah in them. Hence they were alwaVs very 
careful. Alas, things have changed drastically 
since then. 'No wonder, the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) has 
said, "that there will come an era when a 
person who takes even one tenth of care that 
you take, will be singularly better placed than 
others." When the 'Sahabe Hiram' asked its 
reason. He (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) answered, "It is because in these 
days the goodness has an upper hand on the 
evil. This tends piety to your thinking and deeds 
but they will be deprived of it." This should be a 
source of inspiration to all, lest they should 
consider it impossible to take so much care in so 
many things. 

The message is nevertheless clear that piety and 
fear of Allah, His blessings and His worship 
alone can come to one's rescue. Surely, what is 
bad is not only for the bad doer but also for 
others also. Without doubt, evil begets evil. 
Hence, why not adopt the good. The efforts 
made in this direction are never wasted. As 



514 



such it is worth while striving for the kingship of 
the next world but it takes grit and patience to 
do so. 

TO DIFFERENTIATE BETWEEN THE 'HALAL' 
AND 'HARAM' 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said, 

"It is the bounden duty of every Muslim to 
seek 'Halal'. 

It is therefore essential to know what is 'Halal' 
and what is 'Haram'. Of course, the simple definition 
of 'Halal' is that it is permissible by faith and in its 
antithesis 'Haram' is that which is forbidden by 'Fiqa' 
(Islamic Jurisprudence) and the 'Shariat' (The Islamic 
code of conduct), naturally, the degree of what 
constitutes the good and the bad in them vanes. 
Hence in the 'Halal', the good, better and the best 
would apply as would the terms bad, worse and the 
worst apply to 'Haram'. 

THE PROPRIETY AND BLESSINGS OF 
SEEKING 'HALAL* 

Allah has proclaimed. 

. bJu fjUj oiiJi <J£ <& <> 
Messengers, eat of the good things and 



515 

do right.... (23 : 51) 



It is therefore, the weak minded who has 
doubty and misgivings about 'Halal' and 'Haram' who 
has to be most careful. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said that a person 
who earns a livelihood of ('Rizqe Halal') legitimate 
earning for forty days without any 'Haram' in it, would 
be blessed by Allah. His heart would be enlightened by 
His 'Noor' (Light of piety and blessings of Allah) and 
Allah will grant him sagacity and wisdom. "One day 
Hazrat Sa'ad (Allah be pleased with him) humbly 
requested the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) to pray for him so that whenever 
he makes a prayer, his wish may be granted by Allah. 
The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) smiled and said, "Keep on earning 'Rizqe 
Halal'. Your prayers will be heard." The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah he upon him) has also 
said, "How can the prayers of such persons be granted 
who fail to earn 'Rizqe Halal' and then worry about 
their unfulfilled wishes." The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has also stated :- 

A. "That an angel abade in 'Baitul Mugaddas' (The 
Holy Mosque in occupied Israel) has been assigned the 
duty to herald, the proclamation of Allah to the world 
continuously that the prayers of such a person will 
never be granted who does not earn 'Halal' living for 
himself and his family." 

"That the 'Namaz' (The prayers stipulated) of that 
person will not be accepted who may be wearing the 
clothes bought for ten dirhams and even one dirham 
out of them may be not 'Halal'." 



5^6 

•That the relevant flesh of man's body acquired by him 
by 'Haram' means will burn like a flint in Hell fire. 

"That a person who is * ^"J 1 ^ 

earning 'Halal Rizq' or 'Haram' will be sent to Hen 
irrespective of the consideration as totetermine which 
door of Hell he is being thrown there. 

"That nine parts of ten of a person in worship of Allah 
depend on the pre requisite of the man having earned 
'Rizqe Halal' before his prayers." 

"That a person who goes home utterly fatigued and 
tired in his efforts to earn an honest living in a hard life 
and goes to sleep with every limb paining, earns 
Allah's Special Blessings and Happiness." 

"That even one 'Haram' dirham is worse than thirty 
thousand cases of adultery committed by a Muslim. 

"That the charity given out of ill-earned money is 
'Haram' and unacceptible." 

It is related that once the slave of Hazrat Abu 
' Bakr Siddiq (Allah be pleased with him) gave a glass of 
milk syrup to him .which was 'Haram'. He had a 
strange feeling of repulsion while taking it. When he 
came to know of it, he nearly expired with the fear of 
poisoning of his pure blood. He had to wiggle h s 
fingers in his throat till he had vomited the stuff out. 
Yet he was seen tearfully praying "Oh Allah, forgive 
me if any of it is still left in my stomach. Also have 
mercy on my slave that he does not do it again. 

Hazrat Abdullah Bin Umar (Allah be pleased 
with him) once said that "if you say your prayers so 
profusely that your waist may become bent like a bow 



517 



or if you keep on fasting until you become weak and 
lean like a dry stick, neither your 'Namaz' nor your 
'Roza' will be of any use to you if you do not live on 
('Male HalaP) legitimate and pious earnings." 

Hazrat Abdullah Bin Mu'az (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
has said that the worship of Allah is a treasure par 
excellence. The prayer is the key of its chest and the 
'Rizqe Halal' represents the fine teeth of this key. 

Hazrat Shal Tastri (Rahmatullah Alaih) has 
said that it is not easy to fathom the span and the 
significance of 'Eiman' (unflinching adherence to and 
the faith in Allah) nevertheless four of its four aspects 
are of vital importance viz:- 

A. To perform faithful service to Allah as best as 
one can. 

B. To always eat 'Halal' morsels of food for the 
sake of piety and in fear of Allah. 

C. To do good deeds and shun the bad ones. 

D. To live patiently against heavy odds in doing so 
till one's death. 

It was the standing belief of our honourable 
ancestors that the heart of a person who lives on 
('Male Haram') illegitimate earnings for forty days 
becomes black. 

It is stated that Hazrat Ibnul Mubarak 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) , a venerated saint of his time used 
to say that to return a 'suspect' dirham to its source is 
better than gfving a thousand dirhams in charity. 

Hazrat Shal Tastri (Rahmatullah Alaih) used to 
say that the body of a person who takes bribe or 



518 



resorts to taking 'Male Haram' gets polluted and soul 
also gets tarnished. However, no matter how poor a 
person may be, if he lives on 'Male Halal' contentedly, 
bows in worship before Allah in a state of piety of his 
body and soul." 

Hazrat Wahab Bin al-Ward (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) was a highly esteemed saint. He was very 
particular in such matters. One day he was punished 
by his mother that he had become finicky when he 
started questioning his mother when she gave him a 
glass of milk. He asked her "from where it has come? 
Who sold it to you? From where did you pay for it 
etc.?" When she had answered his queries, he again 
enquired 'where did the goat used to graze'. When his 
mother could not give a satisfactory reply to it, he did 
not drink the milk. His mother was pleased at his care 
and piety and said "Allah bless you for it." He thanked 
her for her good wishes but added "Mother, I will not 
take this milk. It is suspect. I do not wish to falter in 
trying to attain such blessings." "Somebody asked 
Hazrat Bashar Hafi (Rahmatullah Alaih) where do you 
take your meals." He answered, "From the place 
where others. do so but there is a marked different 

between a person who eats and cries and the person 
who eats and laughs. He added, obviously referring to 
his poverty that "if the hands of a person be 
constrained and his morsels of food be small, his 
'Taqwa' (Faith in Allah) is riot affected. He still 
manages to exist." 

THE STATUS OF ABSTINENCE AND PIETY IN 
'HALAL-O-HARAM' 

* 

I. As aforementioned the magnitude of what is 
good or bad affects the status of the thing be 
virtuous or vice to the relevant degree. A thing 
may be just permissible, or much admirable or 



519 



extremely pious, accordingly. Vice versa a thing 
may be undesirable, or very bad or extremely 
treacherous. The reward and retribution of it 
also varies correspondingly. 

It is vast subject. Not every one is expected to 
know the 'Fiqah' (Islamic jurisprudence). It is 
however necessary that each person should 
have a general knowledge of it, particularly as 
far as his vocation or trade in hand is 
concerned. For example, with the 'Shariat' to 
help him discern the merchant should know the 
pros and cons of trade and the labourer of his 
occupation. To trangress is to be a sinner. 



The following things are 'Haram' in a 
transaction. 



A. 


To buy or sell a thing which is declared 




'Haram'. 


B. 


To buy or sell with a bad intention. 


C. 


To make a wrong statement in a bargain. 


D. 


'Ghasab' or usurping the 'Mai' of another 




person is worse. 


E. 


Cheating and exploiting the poor is 




worse. 


F. 


The worst of them is usury. It is an 




odious sin. 



So, in the first 'Daraja' or state, to forestall 
doing what is generally forbidden is of the essence. 

« 

II. In the second stage, it is better not to go near a 
thing which may be 'Mushtahab (Doubtful). The 
'Suleha' i.e. the virtuous and pious do so. For 



520 



instance if a 'Mufti' (A person of learning 
empowered to give a 'Fatwa' or verdict) gives 
the verdict that a certain thing is not 'Haram' as 
such but it is 'suspect'. It is better to avoid such 
a thing. Such things may constitute of:- 

A. What is suspect? 

B. What is unknown? 

C. That in which there may be some 
'Waswasa' or doubt. 

That is why, at times certain hunted animals are 
not eaten. Property whose particulars of ownership are 
not clear is not bought. Certain things are not accepted 
whose valid source of orgin is not known. 

HI. The third 'Daraja' (Status: Degree) is of the elite 
(chosen) in faith who used to sometimes avoid 
a thing which was neither 'Haram' nor 
'Mushtabah' on fear or conjecture lest they 
should become sinners by doing a thing which 
may harm somebody at a later stage. 

A. For instance Hazrat Umar Farooq (Allah 
be pleased with him) gave a loan of one 
hundred dinars to some body. But he 
forgot the actual amount given and was 
not sure whether the amount loaned was 
ninety nine dinars or a hundred dinars. 

B. Hazrat All bin al-Ma'bad (Rahamatullah 
Alaih) took a house from somebody, on 
rent. One day he wrote a letter and 
posted its envelope with the fine clay of 
the house. The same night he had a 
dream. In if a white bearded saint told 
him, "You had no right to use the clay 



521 



of an other person." For the same 
reason the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) used to 
forewarn the 'Sulaha' (The pious) against 
such things. The thing became manifest 
when one day Hazrat Hassan Alai uas 
Salam (Allah be pleased with him) by 
mistake took a date of 'Sadqa'. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) immediately said: 



"Spit it out" 

Likewise Hazrat Umar Bin Abdul Aziz 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) closed his nostr ils wi th his ! hands 
when someone offered him mask of 'Male Ghaneemat 
(The spoils of war) and cried out. "Take it away. It is 
the right of the 'Mujahideen' and the Muslims. 

Similarly a 'Buzurg' (A senior person of status) 
was sitting with an.ill person in his hduse The moment 
he breathed his last, he extinguished the candle and 
said, "It is now the 'Mai' of the 'deceaseds 
dependents." 

Ukewise Hazrat Umre Farooq (Allah be pleased 
with him) started washing the 'Dopatta', the headwear 
of his wife till it had lost all its fragrant odour, as he 
was not aware of its source. It was lying in the house 
since long. 

Somebody asked Hazrat Imam Hanbal 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) that if the king sends some musk 
or sandle wood to the mosque, is it permissible to 
smell it?" He replied unhesitatingly. "No. You should 



522 



run away from it as you are not aware if you should 
benefit from it, as you are not aware of its status of 
being 'Halal\" 

The inherent spirit in such lofty conduct also 
used to be not to be enamoured of the world and its 
attractions vis a vis the 'Akhiraf. The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) used to 
preach it to His 'Sahaba' all the time. Hazrat Sufian 
Soori (Rahmatullah Alaih) once punished one of his 
companions not to do so when he saw his comrade 
eyeing the palacious house of a rich person, enviously. 

IV. The fourth 'Daraja' is of the 'Siddiqeen' (one of 
the most elite in Faith) who used to be 
extremely cautious of not accepting or doing a 
thing which was neither 'Haram' nor doubtful in 
any way. Following examples are self- 
explanatory. 

(i) Hazrat Bashar Hafi (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
was known not to take any fruit from the 
welfare gardens of the king. He never 
took a drop of water from water 
fountains provided by him for public use, 
lest his Taqwa' should be sullied in any 
way. 

(ii) Hazrat Imam Ahmad Bin Hanbal 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) did not like anyone 
doing even minor stitching in the 
mosque, as it was the house of Allah. 
He also considered doing any 'Kasab' 
(work for remuneration) in the graveyard 
as it is for the 'Akhiraf. 

Likewise, a woman who was weaving cotton 
near the kings palace stopped it, as soon as the lights 



523 



were put on. She preferred to work in her own 
meagre light. She was a pious lady. 

Hazrat Zunnoon Misri (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
remained in the confinement of some cruel person for 
several days. A lady of virtue who admired his piety 
sent him some food when she came to know of his 
plight. Yet Hazrat Zunnoon (Rahmatullah Alaih) did 
not partake of it. The lady complained and said, "It 
was of 'Rizqe Halal', from the proceeds of the cotton 
that I wove." He replied, "Yes, but I did not take it as 
it was brought to one in the Tabaq' (the platter) of the 
king." 

There is a telling narrative that once Hazrat Sirri 
Saqti (Rahmatullah Alaih) was going in a forest. He 
was very hungry. He saw some fallen tree leaves 
which appeared to be edible. Taking them to be 
'Halal', he was about to eat them when an unknown 
voice addressed him and said, "The power that made 
you travel this, dangerous jungle up to here is also 
competent to give you food. Hence, why have you 
weakened to this extent?" He withdrew his hand 
remorsefully. The status of such 'Siddiqeen' is very 
great. They lived up to it. 

V. Finally, come those beloved friends of Allah 
who become akin to the 'Marafat' of Allah to 
the extent that nothing else matters to them the 
least. They do not budge the least to think of 
saying or doing anything that may not be 
absolutely for Him or from Him. Their status is 
the highest. 

HOW TO DIFFERENTIATE BETWEEN 'HALAL-O- 
HARAM' 

There is so much to know on this subject. 



5^4 

I. Those who think that most of whatever is there, 
is 'Haram', are wrong. 

II. The second category is of those who have 
become opportunists. For them everything is 
valid. They say that it is very cumbersome to go 
into such details of what is right and what is 
wrong. Hence nothing matters in the least. 

III. Then there are those who try to find the mean 
and partake of whatever they can with ease and 
comfort, with some care. 

All these three concepts are wrong for, the 
good and bad, the 'Halal' and the 'Haram' have been 
clearly segregated for the betterment of the man, till 
the Day of Judgement. 

To take the excuse and saying that "I do not 
know what is actually 'Halal' or 'Haram' according to 
the knowledge of Allah. Hence, what am I to do' is 
trying to evade the issue and deceiving one's ownself 
and others also." 

Hence, barring the aforementioned instances of 
a unique nature pertaining to the most distinguished 
persons, the 'Sulaha', 'Siddiqeen' and Prophets, it is 
not difficult to be aware of what is 'Halal' and what is 
'Haram'. To eat or act according to what is not 
forbidden is 'Halal'. So much so that the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) once 
performed 'Wuzoo' (Ablutions) from utensil of a 
'Mushriq' (An in-fidel: A believer in more than one 
Allah). So did Hazrat Umar (Allah be pleased with 
him) at times and even drank water out of it, if it was 
neat and clean. The 'Sahabae Karam' also followed 
their suit and bargained with them. 



525 

m There is no harm in it specially when one is in 
(•Musaftraf) I.e. on a journey. 

« ft Nevertheless it is a folly to contract business 
(,,) Sons with dishonest and cruel persons, 
specially if they deal in 'Male Haram . 

be 'Haram'. 

/ \ Similarly to enter into a bargain with a person 
(V) not be known to be a W 

mau look tike one due to his dealings, 
Temeanour or general attire and dispose . 
not desirable for obvious reasons. 
<„n Last of all to refrain from buying a thing from a 
M pe on who may be wearing showy silken 
Ses or may be so affluent as to use gold o 
silver utensils for his personal use .s not 
d sallowed His riches have nothing to do to 
Sht.ransac.ion, if it 
should also be borne in mind that if a person 
happens to buy something unknow ngly which 
not desirable due to some lacuna found later, 
L w 11 no be liable for it. It is just like a person 
SrnTng to know after 'Namaz' that he was 
unknowingly wearing a shirt which had a slight 
stain on it which was not 'Pak (clean). 

In the same way it is not proper to purchase : a 
thinq from a good man, be over inquisitive and 
^ion him about its source of supply. Bydou^ 
the man is likely to hurt the feelings of his brother 
Muslim, unnecessarily. The living example is that the 



526 

Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him). He used to accept the 'Hadya' (The present- 
Hamble offering) submitted to Him unhesitatingly, 
unless he had specific doubt on the issue. Of course at 
times He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
used to ask whether a thing offered was a 'Hadya' or 
'Sadaqa', if it was not specified. It is one thing to clear 
a doubt and another to embarass a fine person by 
uncalled for query about its authenticity. 

TO PAY SERVILE RESPECTS TO A KING AND 
TAKE DAILY ALLOWANCE AND 'HALAL MAL' 
FROM HIM 

It is not feasible to accept anything from a king 
as, usually his 'Mai' consists of bribery, illegal taxes and 
unfair fines imposed on people. 

For the reason, the remunerations of a 
'Mutawalli' i.e. his authorised administrative assistant, 
the Tabibs' viz the doctors in the government 
dispensaries and the 'Qazi', the judge should be from 
the ligitimate resources of the king, otherwise he will be 
responsible for it in default. 

The relationship of 'Ahle Ilm' (The learned) and 
'Ghair Ahle Ilm' (Not learned) with the king is of three 
kinds. 

(i) The betterment of Faith lies in the faithful not 
going to the king, as far as possible. 

(ii) Likewise, it is not good to call on a king and 
pay one's Salam (Regards and respects) to him 
humbly in servile attitude. 



Once, the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) was describing the ways of 



527 

the cruel kings and their 'Umara' (Paid vassals 
of status) and said, "After Me, many tyrant 
kings wilt come. Those who would chose to 
follow thempeace and be a party to their 
barbarism would be the traitors of Faith and not 
from amongst us. The 'Ulema' should therefore 
specially make it a point to remain away from 
them and form a strong buffer between tyrany 
and justice." 

(iii) The Ulema have a special responsibility. They 
are the learned and the pillars of Faith. They 
have dual duty to perform i.e. to keep away 
from the cruel kings and also educate the 
people to remain away from them. 

Hazrat Abu Zar Ghiffari (Allah be pleased with 
him) has said that a person who goes to the court of 
such kings gives away more in the loss of his faith than 
he attains in the worldly welfare. 

Hazrat Ibne Masood (Allah be pleased with him) 
has said that a 'Muttaqi' (A pious person) who calls on 
such a cruel king returns minus all his piety from there. 

According to Hazrat Fuzyal (Rahmatullah Alaih) , 
the more the 'Ulema' be near a cruel king, the farther 
they will go from their 'Deen' and Allah. 

Hazrat Muhammad Bin Salma (Allah be pleased 
with him) has said that a fly which sits on dirt is better 
than those 'Ulema' who sit in the company of corrupt 
and cruel kings. 

This condemnation of the kings is based on 
following solid facts. 



A. Due to false pomp and show of the palace. 



528 

B. Due to flattery and servile behaviour of people. 

C. Due to cruelty and autocratic conduct of the 
king and his courtiers. 

D. Due to having fear of man, as against the fear 
of Allah. 

E. Due to pretentious behaviour of loyalty to the 
king in the face of visible injustice. 

F. Due to participation in evil sports of the king. 

G. Bowing ones head before the king, fawning on 
him at all hours (at the cost of one's prayers) . 

H. Kissing the hand of a tyrantpeace and bowing 
ones back to pay humble respects to him. 

I. To say words like 'May you and your reign last 
long' to a cruel king. 

J. To pray for the kings long life as a matter of 
formal respect in platitude. 

It is tantamount to treachery of the worst order. 
For, the relevant prayer should be. 

"May Allah reform you. May you learn 
to do good. May Allah grant you a long 
life to enable you to worship Him all the 
while." 

The worst thing in courting the king, is flattery. 
For instance, after having said a prayer for the king, as 
is customary on such occassions, one resorts to 
falsehood by adding. "I adore you so much that I wish 
to pay my respects to you continuously" thereby 



529 



showing his zeal for the favour of the company of the 
king. Vice versa, if he really means it then he is a black 
guard of the first water. Each is worse than the other. 

There are many other evils of the same kind. 
For instance a man may praise the king and call him 
just and fair. Such praise further abets the king's evil 
ego and he starts considering his cruelty to be justified 
and as good as he is being told by his flatterers. 
Thereby the king becomes crueler and the flatterer 
plunges into Hill. 

To be a respectful and silent spectator to the 
roguerypeace and barbarism of the king is equally bad. 
It amounts to agree tacitly to the kings atrocities and 
injustice. . It is also sinful to be a live participant of vain 
display of false pomp and show of the king, usually 
comprising the silken draperies of 'Atlas and 
Kumkhawb', the golden throne, unruly paintings on 
the walls, the ceiling and the floor gorgeously carpetted 
where the courtiers and the king assemble to speak 
arrogantly to the poor and the down trodden. Lies, 
libido and libelous talk is the order of the day there. It 
is impossible for a person to return home clean after 
being in a dusty place. Hence, it does not behove a 
good person to go to such a dirty place. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said, "Oh 'Muhajireen', (Migrators in 
Faith) you have already suffered a lot. Don't go near 
such lustful people and places lest you should be 
sullied and put to further misery." 

Likewise, Hazrat Isa Alaihas Salam (peace of 
Allah be upon him) has also warned. "Be contented 
with honest livelihood. Don't be lured by the rotten 
plentiful. You would be sullied and led astray." 



530 



Of course there is no way out Jn case an 
express order of the king is received by someone to 
present himself in the king's court or if a man has to 
approach the king perforce maieure to have him 

intervened and dispensed justice to him. But when he 
goes to the court under such extenuating circumstances 
beyond his control, he should conduct himself with 
dignity before the king irrespective of the heavy odds 
against him. 

(i) He should pay due regards and respect due to 
the king but he should not utter a word of 
flattery. 

(ii) He should not tell a lie. The facts should speak 
for themselves. 

(iii) If he has to give an advice to the king, it should 
be politely and sagaciously uttered. 

(iv) If a man has to go to the court of a king to 
plead the just cause of someone, he should take 
care to forestall saying words of false praise of 
the king to obtain his objective. Otherwise he 
would becorne a sinner. 

Vice versa, if the king comes to him, which is a 
rarity, he should be hospitable to him. He should stand 
up and receive him as a guest. He should respond to 
the kings 'Salam' (Greetings) courteously as he is his 
guest. Nevertheless, he should not try to win the 
kingpeace and behave as if it is a feather in his cap 
that the king has called on him. On the contrary, he 
should, by word and gesture behave in a manner, 
sincerely believing in it in the hearts of his heart, that 
he prefers the glory of the hereafter to the grandeur of 
this world. 

If he can, he should avail this opportunity to 



531 



advise the king on the matters of the Faith and the 
welfare of the faithful and the difference between 
'Halal' and 'Haram'. He should speak of asserting the 
good and avoiding the bad, as ordained by Allah the 
Great. However, if he thinks that his doing so is not 
feasable, it is better that he keeps quiet. 

It is narrated by Hazrat Maqatil Bin Salih 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) that one day, "I was sitting with 
the venerated saint Hazrat Hammad Bin Salma 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) in his house. It was a poor 
hutment consisting of a mat, a few utensils and the 
'Holy Qur'an'. Suddenly there was a knock on the 
door. Hazrat Salma (Rahmatullah Alaih) went out and 
saw that the 'Khalifae Waqt' (The ruling leader: The 
Ruler) Hazrat Muhammad Bin Sulaiman (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) had come to see him. He invited the 'Khalifa' 
in. As soon as the Khalifa sat down on the mat, he 
respectfully expressed the desire of his 'Bai'at' (To 
become a disciple) . He politely declined it. Thereupon 
the Khalifa laid down forty thousand dJrhams at his 
feet and requested him to put them to his personal 
use. Again Hazrat Ibn Salma (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
declined to accept it saying that he had no need for it, 
moreover the money was the right of the people of his 
kingdom. The Khalifa was dejected and humbly 
submitted that, "It is 'Mal-e-Halal' from my inheritance." 
Still Hazrat Ibn Salma (Rahmatullah Alaih) did not take 
it. Then the 'Khalifa' asked Hazrat Ibn Salma to 
distribute it to 'Mustahikeen' (The deserving) with his 
own hands. Again, Hazrat Ibn Salma (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) did not agree to do so and said that. "I may not 
be able to discharge such responsibility, fairly." 

It is related that once Khalifa, Hazrat Hashsham 
bin Abdullah Malik (Rahmatullah Alaih) went to 'Madina 
al-Munawwara' and asked his people to arrange for 



532 



him to meet some of the 'Sahaba-e-Kiram' 
(Companions of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him), present. He was told that none 
of them was alive. Thereupon he expressed the desire 
to meet any of their Tabieen' (Devotees). They 
brought Hazrat Taoos (Rahmatullah Alaih) to him. 
As soon as he reached there, he proceeded straight to 
the Khalifa (Caliph) with his shoes on, removed them 
at the berm, fearlessly addressed him and said, "As 
Salamo Alaikum (Greetings and safety be to you) 
Hashsham. How are you?" The Khalifa was furious 
over this insolent behaviour and asked him to explain 
why he had walked on with his head high in his 
presence and removed his shoes at the berm, why he 
had called him by his first name instead of his 
('Kunniyat') surname, why he had taken his seat 
without his permission and why had he not kissed his 
hands?" Khalifa 'Hashsham' wanted to take servere 
action against him but all those present intervened and 
asked him to overlook the matter as Hazrat Taoos' 
(Allah be pleased with him) was from the 'Jaware 
Rasool' (of the nearness to the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him). Hazrat Taoos 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) was least perturbed and replied, "I 
remove my shoes five times a day at the berm of the 
mosque daily and Allah has never been angry with 
me. I did not call you the 'Amirul Momineen' as the 
people do not look eye to eye on your richness. If I 
had addressed you as such I would have told a lie. I 
also did not call you by your 'Kunn'iyat' as Allah has 
always addressed his friends by their name such as 
Dawood, Yahyah or All and His enemies by their 
'Kurm'jyat' such as Tabbat Yada Abi Lahab' (Refer to 
chapter in the Holy Book). As for not kissing your 
hands, Hazrat AH (peace of Allah be upon him) has 
said that a person should kiss the hands of his wife as 
her husband and those of his children in filial love. As 



533 



regards sitting before you Hazrat Ali (peace of Allah be 
upon him) has also said that if you want to see a 
'Dazakhi', (An evil person deserving to be sent to Hell: 
dweller of Hell) you should see the person who may 
himself be sitting comfortably while others may be 
standing humbly arms crossed before him." Hazrat 
Hashsham was touched by it, conveyed his regrets to 
Hazrat Taoos (Allah be pleased with him) and 
entreated him to give him some sound advice for his 
betterment. Hazrat Taoos (Allah be pleased with him) 
walked away from there after saying. "There are a 
mountain worth of snakes and camels worth ot 
scorpions in ('Dozakhh') Hell. All of them are anxiously 
awaiting the arrival of an arrogant and unjust ruler. 

It is related in another Hikayat (anecdote) that 
when Khalifa Sulaiman Bin Abdul Malik who was an 
autocrat by temperament, came to Madina al- 
Munawwara', he called the renowned (Alim) scholar 
of faith of the day, Hazrat Abu Hazim (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) and asked him "why is it that we are never 
happy with the concept of death?" He replied, "You 
have made this world your permanent heaven. Hence, 
when you think of leaving it for an other place the 
thought of dislodgement enters your mind. You feel 
uncomfortale as if you are going from an inhabited 
place to a barren land." Then the 'Khalifa' asked him 
"what will happen when everyone would be assembled 
before Allah? He answered, "Those who are pious will 
feel happy as if they have come home to their family; 
to their permanent place of residence, whereas an evil 
doer's condition would be that of an absconding slave 
who has been caught is produced before his master. 
The 'Khalifa' heaved a sigh and remarked. "I wish I 
knew what would my fate be." He answered, "See the 
Holy Qur'an, It is written therein that a pious person 
has nothing to fear. He will be sent to the Paradise, 



534 



while a dissenter would be sent to Hell." It is never too 
late to mend. 

* * 

i <)T : jlkiiVi) 

Surely, the virtuous shall be in Bliss, and 
the law-breakers shall be in Hell. 

(82 : 13, 14) 

Thereupon the 'Khalifa' enquired, "Where is Allah's 
Rehmat?" He replied, 

Surely Allah's Mercy is near the good- 
doers. (7 : 56) 

This is how the learned of the Faith, the 'Ulamai Deen' 
used to behave with the kings in the olden days 

whereas the 'Ulama -e-Dunya' used to act contrarily 
resorting the false praise and flattery of these majestic 
rulers to save their -skin and at the same time to feather 
their nest. 

Ther real safety from the cruel kings and their 
feudal comrades lies in going into solitude, away from 
the humdrum of the worldly feuds and frivolities and 
atrocities of such cruel people. Many Ulema chose to 
do so as the only alternative, in an otherwise untenable 
situation. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) has said that "as long as the 
('Umara') rich and powerful people of an atrocious 
regime would be kept at bay by the 'Ulema' of the 
day, the people of my 'Ummat' (Followrs) will remain 
in safety and peace." In other words it is the king and 



535 



his 'Umara' who are the real menace for the people. 
And it is the 'Ulema' who are the cause of their 
'Kharabi' (The evil). If the Ulema do not support them 
and form a formidable wall of Allah's fear between 
them and justice, these tyrants would not be able to 
perpetrate their atrocities on their subjects, at will. 

An 'Alim' should not accept a donation sent by 
the king for distribution amongst the poor, if he knows 
that it belongs to someone else. It should be returned 
to him. Some 'Ulema' are of the opinion that unless its 
legitimate source is known, the 'Ulema' should decline 
to involve themselves in such charity. But, in our 
opinion it is better to take such 'Mai' from the cruel 
courtiers and give it to the needy. Thus, these 
miscreants will not be able to misuse it in lust and 
lasciviousness. Instead, it will go to the right 
handspeace and be a source of comfort to them. It 
should be delivered to the 'Fuqara' on three basic 
conditions. 

That the king may not be able to have the 
consolation of feeling that as the 'Alim' has agreed to 
be an intermediary, it is 'Male Halal'. He will be further 
instigated to accumulate 'Haram' with a free hand. 

The second condition is that the 'Alim' who 
does so, should set such an example for others that 
they may not be able to take ill advantage of it. There 
may be some so called unscrupulous 'Alims' who may 
receive such donations from the king or the courtiers 
and may not distribute them among the 'Fuqara'. 
Everything should be above board and fair and square 
so that there may not be any element of doubt it it. 
For instance, Hazrat Imam Shafai (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
used to condescend to do so but he used to be rather 
unobvious about it, although he used to h^nd it over 
to the deserving and poor expeditiously personally 



536 



But no one could raise a finger at him due to his 
unimpeachible integrity. 

The third condition is that the 'Alim' should not 
get impressed by the king when he sends such charity. 
It may misguide him to forgetfully start respecting and 
lauding a tyrant and malefactor. This would be a 
criminal, act. So much so, that the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) once raised 
his hands in prayer to Allah and. said, "Oh, Allah. I 
pray, don't give a 'Fasiq-o-Fajir' i.e. an evil person the 
power to do Me a favour, even, since it is likely to 
create good feelings of gratitude for him in my heart. I 
don't want such a thing to happen." Allah has also 
ordained. 

WJ$*Ji&j\lj 

And lean not towards tho^fe who are 
wrongdoers. (11 : 113) 

Once a 'Khalifa' sent ten thousand dinars to 
Hazrat Malik Bin Dinar (Rahmatullah Alaih) to give it 
to the poor and the needy with his own hands. Hazrat 
Muhammad Waasil (Rahmatullah Alaih) asked him, is it 
made you to have a soft corner for the 'Khalifa' in 
your heart? He answered, "Yes, I am impressed. I 
have come to esteem him." "That is personally what I 
feared." Rejoined Hazrat Waasil (Rahmatullah Alaih). 
Such a sentiment is natural? One is apt look at the 
charity offered and forget the intention behind it. For 
all we know, it may merely be for publicity purpose. 

It is narrated that a 'Buzurg' an ascetic in Basra 
was very kind hearted. He always felt for the poor and 
needy and used to »distribute the donation received 
from the king to the 'Fuqara' personally with great 
pleasure. People were not very sure of the king and 



537 



asked him. "Don't you think that not knowing of the 
real spirit behind this charity, you may start liking the 
king and he may actually be propogating his piety." He 
replied, "Don't worry my friends. My heart is in my 
grasp. Even if a culprit catches me by the hand and 
takes me to 'Jannat' I shall not be affected by him. 
Hence, 1 don't want to give up the opportunity of 
doing any good that I can do." Therefore, there is no 
harm in taking whatever the king or his courtiers send, 
and giving it to the 'Fuqara'. 

AMIABILITY AND GOOD FELLOWSHIP FOR 
ALLAH 

It is an illustrious act to be kind and courteous 
to others for the sake of Allah. It is equivalent to the 
worship of Allah. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said, "One of the 
signs of Allah's happiness with His servant is that in His 
sublime mercy He grants a sincere friend to him. He 
works as a guardian angel for him all the time. If he 
sees his friend going astray at any time, he intervenes 
lovingly and puts him to the right path again. This 
selfless friend is an unsolicited guide for him in his 
comrade's journey through life, making things 
easierpeace and better for him assiduously perpetually. 
Also, when two 'Momins' (Staunch Faithfuls) meet, 
they' are a blessing for each other. Such exalted 
behaviour takes them to Paradise. 

Hazrat Mu'az (Rahmatullah Alaih) was a 
wellknown saint. Once Hazrat Abu Idris Kholani 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) told him, "I love you like a sincere 
friend for the sake of Allah." Hazrat Mu'az was 
touched and replied, "Then greetings be to you my 
charitable friend as the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said that the 
friends of Allah would be installed at a seat of honour 



538 



on the Day of Judgement. The scared and the 
sufferable would see them calling with each other, their 
faces glowing like the full moon. Allah has promised 
them that they would have no fear or regret. You 
• have earned such a unique status due to the Divine 
Favour." 

"He is one of those who love each for 
the sake of Allah." 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has further stressed on the love and 
fraternity of the faithful for each other and stated that:- 

(i) The greater the affection and friendship of a 
faithful for his brother to please Allah, the 
Greater will be its 'Sawab' to him.' It results in 
cordial relationship, mutual trust, pleasant give 
and take and a distinct sense of sacrifice and 
service for each other. It makes the community 
more homogeneous and the faithfuls combine 
to make a strong force of fomidable character 
against its adversaries. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has also said that on the Day of 
Judgement seven people would be under the solacious 
shade of 'Arsh', The Seventh Heaven. 

(i) A just king 

(ii) One who spends his life in the fear of Allah, 
from his early youth. 

(iii) One who leaves the mosque to earn his living 



539 



but to all intents and purposes his heart remains 
stuck in the mosque. 

(iv) Two friends of the faith who remain united for 
the sake of Allah or part from each other in His 
cause. 

(v) One who cries in faithful service and worship of 
Allah in solitude. 

(vi) The God fearing man who rejects the flirting call 
of a beautiful woman for the fear of Allah. 

(vii) He, whose left hand does not come to know of 
the charity given by his right hand. 

It is also in the Hadith that:- 

A. When a faithful meets his brother of faith, full of 
love and warm regard for him, an angel calls 
aloud "Congratulations to you. Allah has 
blessed you with Paradise." 

"A man was going to meet his friend with a 
unique sense of elation which showed on his face. An 
angel met him and asked him, "Where are you 
going?" He named his friend and said that "I am going 
to meet him. He is very dear to me. He is my brother 
in Faith." The angel asked, "Have you ever been at 
any service to him?" He answered, "No, Not as yet but 
I have the highest regard for him. I would like to do 
anything to help him." The angel replied, "I have been 
ordained by Allah to give you the good news that 
Allah is pleased with you. You will be sent to Paradise 
for your sincere love for His servant for the sake of 
Allah." 

According to the Hadith, in the chapter and 
verse of ('Eiman') the unflinching faith in Allah, the 
most formidably significant chapter is that of friendship 



540 



with the fellows of one's Faith and enmity with the 
enemies of Allah, in his cause. Allah's 'Vahi' (Allah's 
ordaination and revelation to His Prophets) to one of 
His prophets has a special bearing on the issue wherein 
he was told "you have been rather expeditious in 
attaining a stature of peace and piety for yourself in 
your secluded worship. But have you been involved in 
the friendship of my friends and enmity with My 
enemies?" 

Hazrat Isa (peace be upon him) also advocated 
it to his followers to become the symbol of Allah's 
friendship by being friendly with the friends of Allah 
and by fighting the Allah's foes, as part of Allah's 
veneration and worship. In his sermons he used 
to preach to the people to sit in the company of 
those elite and esteemed friends of Allah whose 
"Deedar' (sight) leads to Allah's 'Marafat' and 
blessing. 

Likewise, when Hazrat Dawood (Prophet David 
peace of Allah be upon him) was told by Allah 'Oh 
Dawood! Why have you left the worldpeace and 
become a recluse in my worship? Go to the people and 
befriend the people specially My friends and resist My 
foes strongly. Prophet Dawood immediately came back 
to his followers. He made friends with the faithful. 
Together they became a strong bulwark of Allah's 
friends against His foes. Resultantly people learnt to 
benefit from the company of ('Ahlullah') the friends of 
Allah and avoid association with those whose dismal 
conduct darkened their souls. 

It is in the 'Hadith' that 'there is an angel, who 
is made half of ice and half of fire. Speaking of the 
variant inherent nature of the people, he keeps on 
praying "Oh Allah, the way you have united together 



541 



the ice and fire in me, in the same way conjoin the 
hearts of Muslims with love of each other, for You." 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has also said that "the faithful whose 
hearts are saturated with unmitigated love of their 
brethern' for Allah, are so fortunate that on the Day of 
Judgement they would be seen perched up on a 
platform made of red rubies having seventy thousand 
vantage points. They would be peeping through these 
apertures into Paradise, before they too are sent there. 
Their luminous shadows would be falling on 'Ahle 
Jannat' (The dwellers of Paradise) . They would say let 
us go near them and see who they are. Their faces are 
brilliantly lit like the sun." These friendly faithful would 
be clad in gorgeous silken robes of emerald green. The 
following words would be inscribed on their fascinating 
foreheads. 

'Those who loved each other only for the 
sake of Allah." 

It is related that Hazrat Samak's (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) last words of prayer at the time of his 
death were: "Oh Allah, I seek Your forgiveness of 
my sins for my lifelong endeavour to be friendly 
with your faithful*. In Your sublime Mercy kindly 
treat it as expiation of my black deeds and have 
Mercy on me." 

The truth is never over-repeated. Similarly 
Hazrat Mujahid (Rahmatullah Alaih) used to tell the 
people in his sermons to them over and over again 
"Be sincere and serviceful to the human beings, 
specially your brothers in faith for the sake of Allah. 



542 



You do not know, when you do so, your sins fall 
apart like dried leaves of a tree, from you. You 
blossom forth with virtue, anew." 

THE MEANING OF FRIENDSHIP FOR ALLAH 

Friendship with a handsome person, mere 
verbal pleasantry and light heartedness in dealings with 
people in common day life in one's neighbourhood, at 
work or in travel and transit is good but does not 
constitute the friendship for Allah. It has a much higher 
and nobler span and stature. The man has no axe to 
grind in it. Such behaviour is based on piety. Hence 
there is nothing petty or pedestrian in it. It is based on 
stern faith in Allah, on man's 'Eiman' on Him. There 
are two 'Daraja's' of it. 

It is therefore not difficult to comprehend that a 
man, who admires and esteems his tutor because he 
teaches him certain Ilm' which will help him in this 
world is not in that category where he may be able to 
say to himself 'I am doing it for Allah'. However, if the 
attainment o.f such learning may be with the basic idea 
to become so competent by learning it that he may be 
able to achieve the happiness of Allah, such an 
association between the teacher and the student will be 
rewarded according to the degree of their good 
intention to this effect. 

Following examples can be given for the first 
category. 

(i) The man who distributes the 'Sadaqa' handed 
over to him, to others with a feeling heart. 

(ii) The cook, who prepares the food for the 
'Fuqara' in a state of enchantment over the 
happiness of the hungry and the destitutes, in 



543 



the love of Allah. 

(iii) The man who supports an 'Abid o Zahid' 
engrossed in singularly undisturbed worship of 
Allah. 

(iv) The husband's adoration of his wife who 
protects him from sin and gives birth to their 
children. 

The second, 'Daraja' is far more elegant. It 
implies, to love someone only for the love of Allah. It's 
('Sawab') reward is also commensurate with it. When 
the adoration of a lover reaches its climax, he comes 
to dote on everything even remotely connected with 
his beloved. The city, the neighbourhood, the streets 
of his beloved's residence achieve a singular 
significance for the lover. Even the beloved's dog has a 
cherished status in such adoration. Such reverence and 
veneration is greeted and rewarded by Allah the 
Beneficient with such unique rewards that the man 
remains wonder struck. The lovers of Allah love Him 
for the smallest things. For instance the first fruit of the 
season used to be relished by the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) with rare 
sanctimony. He used to kiss it, fondle it lovingly to the 
eyes and praise Allah for His creative genius. 

In short, the power of Allah's love reflects in the 
magnitude of man's amity and adoration for everything 
pertaining to Him. Then comes the stage that he 
attains the enviable stature of a 'Vali', 'Saleh' or a 
'Siddiq'. No wonder, Hazrat Abu Bakr (peace of Allah 
be upon him) was raised to the stature of a 'Siddiq' 
when he did not leave even a needle back at home, in 
the path of Allah, on the call of the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him). The 
greater the 'Eiman', the worthier is the status of a 



544 



'Momin' in the love of Allah. 

FIGHTING AGAINST THE ENEMIES OF ALLAH 

The obedient servant and friend of Allah is the. 
enemy of enemies of Allah. He battles against the evil 
doers, the 'Mushirqs' and 'Kafirs'. However, if a 
Muslim becomes a man of bad character, taking to the 
ways of the Satan, he deserves to be treated as a 
friend but he will incur the anger of his brother Muslim 
for his bad deeds. Thus the 'love-hate* relationship will 
come into being. The friendship and enemity will come 
together. 

For example, if a person has three sons. One of 
them is clever and obedient. The other is a fool and 
disobedient to him. The third, is foolish but obedient. 
As such, the first son is like his friend, the second son 
like an enemy and the third son will be an admixture 
of love and hatred both to him. Likewise, the enemies 
of Allah are also in different categories. It is natural 
that the heart of a good man will repel when he comes 
across a mean or lowly person. Likewise, a lustful and 
lewd person will generate strong sentiments of 
antipathy in the heart of a faithful person. The degree 
of spontaneous response will vary according to the 
magnitude of the evil. 

It is said that once Hazrat Imam Ahmad Bin 
Hunbal (Rahmatullah Alaih) expressed strong 
resentment at Haaris Muhasabi (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
and said, "That you wrote 'lime Kalam'. In this book 
you have wantonly created strong doubts on certain 
issues and then gone on to the assimilate and justify 
them. This is strange ethics you have thus sowed the 
seeds of many misgivings in our treatise. 

Similarly, he was very annoyed with Yahyah 



545 



Bin Mueen (Rahmatullah Alaih) whom he liked as a 
pious but-poor person when he said that, "I will not 
take anything from anybody except the king, "Hazerat 
Imam Ahmad Bin Hunbal (Rahmatullah Alaih) stopped 
talking to him after reprimanding him severely for 
seeking alms from a tyrant king, thus befriending the 
enemies of Allah for petty profits of this world. His 
plea that he had said so jokingly was not acceptible to 
him. Later he apologised and made him amends for. 

Yet, there are some 'Buzurgane Deen' (The 
elite of the Faith) who have been kindly disposed 
towards the errant with prayers and purposeful advice, 
but there" is an inherent danger of the misguided man 
going further astray due to such tolerance of their 
vicious traits. The better among them pay heed to their 
elders and reform. The others become the devil's 
disciples and all the love and affection showered on 
them to mend their ways is wasted. Such miscreants 
have to be disciplined with an iron hand. You can 
compare the forces of evil and the good, by the 
episode when the teeth of the Holy Prophet- (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) were mortyred by 
the 'Kafirs'. He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) was bleeding profusely and praying. 

"Oh Allah the Merciful. Kindly endow 
discernment to my people. They know 
Me not." 

So, if a person's wrath is invoked in his own 
case and he is lukewarm and complacent in the Affairs 
of Allah, he had better learn to draw the line correctly. 
If a heinous perpetrator of crimes against the Faith and 
Allah is let loose, it would tantamount to aiding and 



546 

abetting him in his vicious designs, with obvious 
repercussioas. 

That is why the punishment for such people is 
sever«, c«W©«&»rto their cursed actspeace and 
behaviour. 

<i) The Kafir should be killed or imprisoned. A 
friend of Allah can not tolerate their mischief 
and is always clamorous in their condemnation. 
Friendship with them is untenable and 'Haram 
as dictated by Allah. 

( T t : ifcbsuH) • • • J 

Thou shalt not find a people who believe 
in Allah and the Last Day, loving those 
who oppose Allah and His Messenger. ... 

(58:22) 

To install them as the rulers of the faithful and to 
repose trust in them is the felony of the first order and 
an utterly un Islamic act. 

r 

It is also necessary to be mistrustful of the 
'Bidatees' i.e. the people who prompt people towards 
undesirable acts. They are mischief mongers. Their 
principal aim is to misguide the faithful. They sow the 
seeds of doubt and disunity in the Muslims. It is 
essential to nip their evil in the bud. They deserve to 
be shown by word and gesture that the faithful dislike 
them. 

Tolerance of following category of people is also 
'Haram'. 

A. The cruel and the tyrant who make the lives of 



people miserable by their sadism. 



B. A ealuminous person. A person who gives 
wrong statements and is an untrustworthy 
witness. 

C. A back-biter. 

D. A mischief monger . 

E. An evil satirist who takes pride in slandering 
people out of force of habit. A staunch Muslim 
should look down upon thempeace and be 
always guarding of them. They can cause so 
much damage. 

Likewise a drunkard and a sex maniac should 
also be firmly dealt with by one and all. Nevertheless, 
as such a person does more damage to himself than 
others, he should be taken to task adequately. No 
effort should be spared to put him on the right path. 

Life should be made difficult for him till he reforms. 
However, he deserves to be cured more than 
condemned. 

It is related that once the 'Sahaba-e-Kiram' 
bitterly criticised, condemned and cursed a drunkard as 
he had not given up taking liqour despite promises 
made to this effect. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) came to know of it 
and checked them from doing so and said, "Don't 
curse and condemn him for his mischief. He is already 
near his nemesis due to the Satan's enmity with him. It 
is enough for him. Don't aid and abet the devil." 

THE CODE OF CONDUCT IN 
COMPANIONSHIP 

Don't forget that not everybody is worthy of 



548 



being made a friend or a companion. Three things are 
necessary for it. 

(i) That he should be a wise person. A fool's 
friendship is* apt to be onerous and even 
dangerous. Such companionship is likely to end 
up in awakward moments and unpleasantness. 
The wise have said that to cast a glance on the 
face of such a person is sinful, as it results in 
dulling the intellect of the viewer. 

(ii) The second essential requirement is that a man's 
friend should be a well behaved cultured person 
of good manners. An awkward person becomes 
a slur on the companionship of his friend. 

(Hi) The third pre-requisite is that the man's friend 
should be a pious person. His piety will always 
stand them in good stead. Undoubtedly, a 
person who does not have the fear of Allah in 
him, will not have a decent consideration for 
the man in his heart. He is untrustworthy. It has * 
been ordained by Allah. 

And do not obey him, whose heart We 
have made " neglectful of Our 
Remembrance, and who follows his 
caprice.... (18 : 28) 

It is essentialto refrain from a 'Bidatee' (A person who 
does and misleads others to do undesirable things). 
The devil misleads people. So does a 'Bidatee'. By 
devious means, he sets such things afloat which cut at 
the roots of the Faith. He acts craftily. So much so, 
that such thinking gets abroad that "we are not the 
rulers of people. So, why should we worry if we see 



549 



people drinking or making merry in the manner thev 
like etc." 

Hazrat Jaffer Sadiq (peace of Allah be upon 
him) has said that we should abstain from having 
anything to do with the people of following kinds. 

(i) A liar 

(ii) An idiot 

(iii) A stingy person 

(iv) A coward 

(v) A depraved, promiscuous person. 

No explanation is required for remaining away 
from them. They are the scum of the earth. 

LOVE AND COMPANIONSHIP 

Like the holy wedlock, an unwritten law a code 
of conduct governs the companionship of the faithful. 
It has its own rights and responsibilities. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has remarked that 'friends in faith are like two 
brothers. They can be compared to the two hands of a 
person. Both help each other. Each one of them 
washes the other." There are ten principal features of 
companionship or friendship in Faith. 

(i) The most important of them is the monetary 
right. It consists of considering the financial right of his 
friend superior to his own. At times, it results in the 
man giving up his share to his brother in faith. Hence, 
it constitutes trje highest degree of sacrifice for the 
man's companion. Like it is ordained in the Holy 
Qur'an for 'Ansar' 



550 



And preferring them above own selves* 
though they had a want... (59 : 9) 

The second virtue lies in considering his own 
assets and those of his friend joint property whereby 
each has full right over the 'Mai' of the other. In other 
words the 'Mai', the worldly assets have no overriding 
value or superiority over their friendship. Once a fellow 
asked his friend for four thousand dirhams. He 
promised to give the amount but did not hand over 
the full sum required. The friend in need had blind 
faith on his friend and could not conceive that his 
friend would do so, otherwise he would not have 
asked him for it. He was so shocked that he left his 
friendship with him for good and told him,- "You 
profess to be a friend of mine for Allah, but give 
preference to the worldly goods over Allah. Now there 
is nothing left between us." 

There is a 'Hikayat' that one day some people 
instigated the king against some saints. The backbiting 
took its effect. The king ordered that they should be 
hanged. Hazrat Abul Hassan Noori (Rahmatullah 
Alaih), a venerated saint of the time was also amongst 
them. When the time of their being beheaded arrived, 
Hazrat Abul Hassan stepped forward and said, "I 
request you to kill me first." The king was taken aback 
and asked, "Why?" He replied, "Because they are my 
friends and brothers. I want to sacrifice my life 
for them before anything happens to them." This 
opened the eyes of the king. He set them all free and 
said, "How can I see such affectionate people die who 
are prepared to give their lives for each other." 

Hazrat Fatah Moosll (Rahmatullah Alaih) went 
to the house of an intimate friend. Per chance, he was 
not at home. He asked the hand-maiden of the house 



551 



to bring the family money-box to him. She did so 
unhesitatingly. He took whatever amount he was in 
need of and returned home. When she informed the 
owner of the house of the incident, he was so 
overjoyed and pleased with her that he set her free, on 
the spot. 

A person went to Hazrat Abu Huraira (peace of 
Allah be upon him) and said, "I want to become your 
friend." Hazrat Abu Huraira (peace of Allah be upon 
him) asked him, "Do you know what right a friend has 
over his friend?" He said, "I am not aware." Hazrat 
Abu Huraira replied, "In such an eventuality I will have 
greater right over your 'Mai' than you have over it." 
He was astonished and replied, "Sir, I have as yet not 
reached that status where I may be able to do so." 

It was narrated by Hazrat Ibne Umar (peace of 
Allah be upon him) that one day a friend of his sent 
him a dish. He sent it to a friend of his who was a 
destitute. When it reached him he sent it to an other 
friend, in turn. Like this it kept on rotating between his 
circle of friends and ultimately came back to him. This 
tells the full story of how they felt for each other. 

Hazrat Masrooq and Hazrat Khashima (peace of 
Allah be upon them) were great friends. Both were 
hard pressed and under debt. Each one of them paid 
off the debt of the other person some how quietly. 

Hazrat Ali (Allah be pleased with him) once- 
remarked that 'those twenty dirhmas which I am able to 
spend on my friend are far better than the hundred 
dirhams that I may give in charity. 

One day the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) prepared two wood sticks for 



552 



brushing the teeth, in a forest. One of them was 
straight and the other crooked. He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) gave the straight 
brushing stick to one of His companions and kept the 
other Himself. The 'Sahabi' humbly offered it back to 
him and said, "peace and blesings of Allah be upon 
you. This stick is better. I beseech you to kindly use it 
yourself."- The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) smiled and replied, "No. It is for 
you. If a person has the least care or consideration for 
his companion, how can he help but prefer his 
companion over himself. What reply will he be able to 
give to Allah on the Day of Judgement?" Everyone 
likes himself but he who loves others regardless of 
himself and more than his own's self, is the one whom 
Allah likes the most. 

This is what our ancestors used to do. There is 
nothing like being the first to serve a friend selflessly. 
For a man to look after his friend's interest all the time, 
to render unsolicited assistance to him, so that the 
friend may not have to ask for help is a great virtue. A 
good friend helps his friend and feels obliged also, 
grateful, as he has been able to assist him. That is why 
Khawja Hassan Basri (Rahmatullah Alaih) once 
remarked that a friend of Faith is dear to him than his 
own family. 

Hazrat Ata (Rahmatullah Alaih) once remarked, 
"Look after your friends constantly. Don't let even 
three days pass. Call on them. Enquire after their 
health and happiness. If your friend is sick, it is your 
duty to minister to him diligently. Lend your friends a 
helping hand in their work." 

Hazrat Jaffer bin Muhammad (RahmatuHah 
Alaih) used to help even his enemies secretly. One of 



553 



our ancestors looked after the family of his deceased 
friend for forty years. Yet he was not happy with his 
performance. 

Also, a Muslim praises his friend in his absence. 
He covers up his faults. Friendship is based on mutual 
trust and love as depicted in the aforementioned 
examples. Therefore, the last thing that a person wants 
to encounter is his friends unhappiness with him. If his 
friend is in the least aggrieved, the man should be 
gracious to make amends and soothe him at all costs. 
Surely if a friend car. not bear the suffering and 
distress of his comrade due to other reasons, how can 
he let his friend be angry with him on any account. 
The man at fault must apologize to him while his friend 
should make up with him quickly to forestall his 
suffering. Love begets love. What is more, the 'Deen' 
becomes a formidable bond of friendship between two 
brothers of Faith, who are companions and love each 
other sincerely. 

That is why there is no fear of 'Munafiqat' 
(Treachery; Duplicity) between true firends for the 
•Momin' (Staunch in Faith: of 'Eiman') always tries to 
find ways and meaiy to do good. In antithesis, the 
'Munafiq' always remlins in pursuit of the bad and tries 
to exploit it to the 'detriment of another person. It is 
the saying of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) said: "One should away from a 
shallow acquaintance. Such a person propogates the 
shortcomings of others exaggeratedly and hesitates to 
state their good qualities." 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that the four things of a 
'Momin' are Haram for others i.e. His 'Jan', 'Mai', 
Aabroo (Self respect) and his 'Qaul' (The word of 
honour). 



554 



Hazrat Isa (peace of Allah be upon him) once 
told his followers that a person who brings his brother 
Muslim to disrepute before others is a sinner. He is like 
a person who removes the clothes of his brother before 
others and makes him naked. Even the viewers abhor 
this act." 

The sages of the olden times used to preach 
that if you make a friend, he should know his friends 
affairs like Allah the Merciful does. He should also try 
to cover up his shortcomings in the same way. 

A man took his friend into confidence on a 
certain secret. Then he asked him, "Do you remember 
it?" He said, "No. I dont." He added that "a person 
should be trustworthy at four stages i.e. when he is 
angry, when he is tempted, when he is in hours of 
profound happiness and when sex urges overtake him. 
You may rely on me." 

Hazrat Abbas (peace of Allah be upon him) one 
day told his young son, " 'Amirul Momineen', Hazrat 
Umre Farooq (peace of Allah be upon him) has made 
you his close associate in preference to many elders. 
You should be careful of five thills. 

A. You should safeguard the secrets of the state. 

B. You should not speak ill of any person behind 
his back. 

C. You should never tell him a lie. 

D. You should never disobey him. 

E. You should be scrupulously honest. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) used to advise the people to .maintain 
peace and harmony in Faith by forestalling these 
undesirable traits. 



555 



(i) To enter into arguments and controversies with 
each other. 

(ii) To make a mockery of others. To ridicule them. 
(Hi) To dishonour one's word. 

Hazrat Abu Saeed Durrani (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
had a friend. He used to give him whatever he wanted 
happily without any hesitation. One day he asked his 
friend for something. For the first time he enquired of 
him. "How much." Hazrat Abu Saeed (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) felt hurt. He said he has lost the lustre of the 
pride in friendhsip, since then. 

True friendship is glorified by the expression of 
love and confidence by word and gesture. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has said, 

"When anyone of you loves his brother, he 
should inform him of it." 

* 

Indeed, by such expression of selfless love for a 
friendpeace and brother in Faith for the sake of the 
auspicious favour and the happiness of Allah the 
Merciful; the Mutual amity and love between friends, 
the love becomes twofoldpeace and blessed. 

Hazrat Umar (peace of Allah be upon him) used 
to tell the people to call each other with words of love 
and respect. He also used to be the first to greet the 
other as such. It used to touch their hearts specially 
due to his habit of praising their before others in their 
absence. They took a leaf out of his bookpeace and 
became adorned with such pleasant temperament with 
their brethem in faith that even the non-Muslim used 



556 



to envy them. 

It was a rare sight in 'Quroone Oola' (The 
earlier times). Friends used to solve the problems of 
their friends arbitrarily without their knowledge and 
used to receive the grateful thanks of his comrades 
when he used to tell others how nobly his friend has 
acted for him in relieving him from a state of suffering 
or distress. Once a friend was seen thanking his friend 
profusely for having paid off his loan without his 
knowledge. But the benefactor was humbly bowing, 
smiling, kissing him and patting him on the back 
without saying a word. 

It is also a friends duty to impart whatever 'Ilm' 
he knows, to his friend and to correct the conduct of 
his friend in such a discreet way that he may not feel 
what is happening. Of course, he has to set the good 
example of it first. The evil habits, the bad traits in man 
are like scorpions and snakes. A loving friend would 
never like his brother to be harmed by them. A sage 
once said the same thing in different but sarcastic 
words that "a man is known by the company he 
avoids." 

So, when it comes to reforming the friend of his 
sinful traits, the duty of the friend becomes manifest in 
order that his friend may become virtuous,peace and 
be known to keep good company rather than he 
himself should feel that he is moving in bad company. 
And a Muslim never does bad deeds. His staunch faith 
makes him a 'Momin'. He gets cleansed and purified 
day by day. 

The 'Muhasiba* (Accountibility) of self was a 
redeeming feature of 4he elite of the Faith. Once 
Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq" (peace of Allah be upon him) 



557 



asked Hazrat Salman Farsi (peace of Allah be upon 
him) to tell him about his weak points. He was 
reluctant to do so and kept quiet. On Hazrat Abu Bakr 
Siddiq's (peace of Allah be upon him) insistence he 
said "I have come to know that you have two kinds ot 
dishes on your ('Dastarkhawn') dining cloth every 
day " He bowed his head and remorse, and thanked 
him' brokenly. Therefore, a good man, who is always 
on the look out to over come his drawbacks is never 
ungrateful to his 'Nasiheen' )Plural of 'Nasih'. One who 
gives a good advice) . 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has also said: 

"A believer is like a mirror for the other 
believer." 



Hence, when a 'Momin' (Man of staunch 
'Eiman' Faith) gives advice to his brother 'Momin' it is 
always for his good. He should be grateful to him for it 
rather than be hurt by it. As a matter of fact, one can 
only disclose ones secret sorrows to a friend only and 
seek his help and advice how to overcome his 
weaknesses. For the same reason Hazrat Umre Farooq 
(peace of Allah be upon him) has said that, "May 
Allah bless that friend of mine who may present my 
shortcomings to me as a gift ('Hadya' : Respectful 
offering)." 

Thus a man who resents such an advice 
whether sought or unsolicited must know that the 
poison of pride and self-esteem has entered his veins. 
The sooner he cleanses it, the better it is for him. No 



558 



doubt, as far as possible, such advice should be subtly 
and softly conveyed. It is always more effective. A 
sensible word is always better than a stricture. 

- & V*>*$ 'dfl j 

"But you do not like the sincere 
advice." 

Hazrat Abu Bakr Katani (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
has related his personal experience. He said, 'One day 
I forgot myself peace and became rather harsh with my 
friend. I loved him a lot. After that remorse bit 
persistently at my heart. I went to my friend 
immediately, begged his pardon entreatingly, and 
asked him to put the tip of his toe on my face saying 
that it has imbued me with shame over what I have 
done. He also loved me very much, although he must 
have been grievously hurt but declined to do so. Upon 
this, I told him that I shall never get up from this 
reclining posture unless he did so. He had no ther 
alternative but to accede to my request. Only after that 
I felt better.' 

Hazrat Abu Ali Rabati (Rahmatullah Alaih) stated 
that Hazrat Abdullah Razi (Rahmatullah Alaih) was 
his companion in a journey. He asked me, "Will you 
be its leader or I"? I replied, "Of course, you." 
Thereupon he remarked, "If so, you will have to obey 
my instructions." I happily replied, "It will be my 
pleasure." Thereupon he sent for a large utensil, 
collected and stored all our effects in it put them on his 
back and started forth on the journey with me. He was 
an older man than me and a holy saint. I kept on 
beseeching him to give it to me so that I may carry this 
load, but each time he retorted that "you have 
accepted my leadership. Now you have to obey my 
command." In our travels, one night it started raining 



559 



cats and dogs. To my despair and utter dismay he kept 
on standing with a stretched blanket all night to protect 
ourselves from the onslaught of heavy showers." 

It is a trenchent story of the olden days. Two 
friends loved each other a lot. But one of them fell in 
love with a woman and told his friend that he has 
become absolutely non composed for her and he 
would not be satisfied until he is sexually satiated by 
her. His friend was dumb founded to hear it. He tried 
his level best to stop his friend but to no avail. On the 
contrary, one day his misguided friend asked him to 
sever his relationship with him as he was not worthy of 
it any more. He replied to his errant companion. 
"This is out of question. I love you dearly." After that 
his noble friend raised his hands in silent prayers before 
Allah to grant his friend recovery from this ailment 
without blemish and resolved not to take anything to 
eat or drink till his friend became normal again. Forty 
days passed on in this state but his erroneous friend 
did not know anything about it, Thereafter his friend 
entered the house of his famished companion and told 
him that 'now I have relented and fully recovered of 
my folly without any misdemeanour.' At the same time 
he was touched by the plight of his friend who was 
about to die of hunger for him. He cried before his 
worthy companion and kept on cursing himself and 
asking his friend. "Why did you put yourself into this 
agony for such a brute as me. Why did you not forget 
me? Why did you not cast me off as a lecher?" He 
answered gracefully, "No, How could I do it? You are 
my friend. You needed me the most at this juncture! I 
can't be a friend of yours if I see you want only go to 
Hell and do nothing about it." 

Two dear friends of 'Bani Israel' (Israelites) used 
to worship Allah in solitude on a mountain. One of 



560 



them went to take articles of food to the 'bazaar' in the 
village below. He happened to see a beautiful woman 
of questionable character there. He fell in love with her 
at first glance. He got so enamoured of her that he 
forgot all his piety and his friend, and remained in that 
state of evildoers for several days. His friend on the 
mountain got worried about him and came down to 
look for him. When he met his lost friend, he refused 
to recognise him out of a growing sense of shame. The 
senior friend fully understood his predicament, kissed 
him, embraced him and said, "Don't you worry my 
friend. Do not have the least hesitation. My friendship 
for you is the greatest today, so is my responsibility to 
look after you. Allah is very Merciful. He will save us. I 
am sure that you will come out of this perplexity with 
flying colours." His unfortunate friend was stunned to 
hear it, started paying penance to Allah in his heart, 
stood up and went up the mountain with his friend, a 
chastened person. 

The moral of the story is that 'Qatahe Rehmi' 
(To give up mercifulness) for an errant friend is not in 
order. Even the 'Fiqah' which is rather stringent in 

values, teaches us that the bond of friendship in Faith 
should be so strong between the faithful that such 
impediments should not be able to breach it. 

The Almighty Allah has ordained in the Holy 

Book. 

( Y VV.T^iJi) o b'&l & lUji 'J\ #J bli 

Then if they disobey thee, then say: I am 
innocent of what you do. (26 : 216) 



* 



561 

The friends of Hazrat Abul Darda (peace of 
Allah be upon him) once asked, him why he tolerated 
his brother who had gone to the devil with wine and 
women. He replied, "He has become his own enemy. 
After all he is a faithful. If I also become his enemy he 
is likely.to go to the devil completely. So, let me fulfill 
my duty towards him first." He added that "one 
should be careful in making friends with the right 
people in the first instance but after the friendship has 
been established, it is his duty to stand by him in his 
hour of need, specially if he is inclined towards the 
evil. Feel for the other more than for your own self. A 
friend in faith is a great asset. Friendship demands that 
a good friend should not be allowed to destroy 
himself He may have gone far in to the clutches of 
the Satan and his disciples. He should therefore be 
helped inspite of himself. Virtue lies in deterring him 
from the evil and not in discarding a friend, 
momentarily gone astray." 

So much so, that the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) had to intervene and 
advise the faithful that "a person who does not accept 
the ('Uzur') plea of a brother. Muslim and is harsh to 
him acts like a tyrant who extracts tax from the 
wayfarer by force." 

No doubt, a Muslim has strong likes and 
dislikes. He asserts the good and assails the bad by 
force of habit. Thus, an in-built mechanism in his 
character makes him react spontaneously. Hence, a 
faithful is likely to get annoyed with the evil quickly but 
he also likes reformation in the faithful equally as 
muchpeace and becomes happy, soon. 

Hazrat Abu Sulaiman Darani (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) used to repeatedly advise his disciples to be 



562 



carefulpeace and be good to their friends and the 
faithful. His motto was, "Don't react strongly towards 
your friend. Don't be cruel to him if he does something 
which hurts you. For it is likely that if you do so you 
may hear something worse about it later. It may hurt 
you and your friend more than you were hufc in the 
first instance." He was a sage. A 'Vali\ His disciples 
followed his advice and found that his advice was 
worth more than its weight in gold. 

Under the circumstances, if a friend is such a 
prized possession in life, he should be remembered 
after his death. It is a collosal loss to lose a friend. 
Therefore, a good friend always keeps praying for his 
friend after his demise, exactly the way he used to do 
in his life time. 

It is in the 'Hadith' that when a person offers 
prayers for his departed friend, an angel prays for him 
in turn. Allah also grants his prayers for himself, in 
lieu. 

Hazrat Abul Darda (peace of Allah be upon 
him) once said, "1 say prayers for seventy of my 
departed friends in 'Sajda', by name, daily." He also 
remarked once that "a true friend is seen praying with 
tears in his eyes for his friend after his death whereas 
the deceased's next of him are absorbed in bickeringly 
sharring his inheritance." It is in the 'Hadith' that at the 
time of a man's death his condition can be compared 
to a drowning person catches at a straw. These prayers 
of his friend stand him in good stead in setting him 
afloat. The 'Dua' of the living for the dead is never 
wasted. These prayers are beautifully bedecked or 
adored in luminous chests and shown to the dead with 
the names of people who have sent these heartfelt gifts 
for him. 



563 



To say that' 'I am your friend' is to make a 
solemn pledge, to maintain lasting friendship. It applies 
not only to his association with him in his life time but 
also to his cherished memory after his death. 

Our worthy ancestors used to love their friends 
in their life time and in practical proof of it also shower 
their love on his family members after his demise. 
There was no disassociation (Qata Ta'alluq) in any 
farm. It was common practice in the olden days that if 
either of the two poor friends became rich or got an 
elevated status in life, he never forgot his friend and 
always treated him in the same old affectionate way as 
before. It is all the more praiseworthy to do so because 
the ('Shaitan') Satan always tries to create a bone of 
contention between friends. Allah the Merciful has 
proclaimed. 

The Devil provokes strife between them.... 

(17 : 53) 

And, The Prophet Yousuf (Joseph) (peace be 
upon him) has said: 

jla-iJI £j) 0\ *jUj # j JJI # ^ tWr j 
( \ . . : Jlsji) * 'J_y-\ '£ j 

And brought you from the desert after the 
Devil had set strife between me and my 
brothers.... (12:100) 

Consequently, a good friend can never be 
instigated against his friend by any mischief monger. 



564 



Also, a friend never makes friends with the enemy of 
his beloved friend. 

There should be no formality amongst friends. 
Mutual love and trust makes them become trusting and 
informal. There can be no friendship where there is 
formality. 

It is the saying of Hazrat Ali (peace of Allah be 
upon him) that "that companion is the worst with 
whom one may have to be formal. Friendship and 
formality are poles apart." 

Similarly, once Hazrat Junaid Baghdadi 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) remarked, "I have seen many 
friends in life; even such friends, one of whom is in 
power and the other poor but their friendship 
dwindled." 

The most exemplary friendship is that of the 
'Aulia Allah' (Plural of 'Vali': The sacred friends of 
Allah) with each other and with other faithful. It is so 
heartwarming. 

The last but not the least, a true friend can 
never consider his friend inferior to htnself, in any 
way. He has no axe to grind with his frined. On the 
countrary, a friend serves his friend .and considers 
himself fortunate, if he is able to serve him for the love 
of Allah. 

Somebody told Hazrat Junaid (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) that 'sincere friends are very rare these days." 
He repeated it several times before him. Hazrat Junadi 
Baghdadi (Rahmatullah Alaih) replied, "You may have 
a point, if you are looking for someone who may feel 



565 



for you and serve you. But if you have somebody in 
mind whom you may be able to serve, then there is no 
dearth of them." 

The secret of finding the truth lies in giving and 
not is taking, for, rather than a friend serve him, the 
true friend always wants to serve him instead. And if 
the other also wants to do the same, then the true 
frienship emerges in its pristine glory two minds with 
but a single thought, two hearts that beat as one. 

Hazrat Abu Muavia Al'aswad (Rahamtullah 
Alaih) was a venerated saint. He used to love his 
friends devotedly. Still, he could not help but exclaim 
one day, "All of my friends are better than me No 
matter what I do, I can not hold a candle to them. 
They give me preference over all things. They give me 
respect for my 'Bazurgi' (Being old : Respected). 

THE RIGHTS OF MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD, 
ASSOCIATES, NEIGHBOURS, ASSISTANTS 

Bear in mind, that the rights of people are 
commensurate with the kinship or relationship with 
them. Each person is responsible to Allah for it. 

The frist right is that what one does not like for 
himself, he should not like it for others. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said, "Muslims are a brotherhood. 
They are one entity. They are like a body. If a part of 
it is hurt, the entire body feels the pain:" 



It is also in the Hadith, "If you want to ward off 
being sent to Hell, the best 'Maui' (Death) is in leading 
a life seeking the best for others as you like for yourself 



566 



and then breathing your last with the 'Kalimae Eiman' 
(Confirmation of Faith : of Allah and His Holy Prophet 
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) on your 
lips." 

Hazrat Musa Alai has Salam (peace of Allah be 
upon him) asked Allah, "Oh Almighty, who is the 
most just person in your creation?" Allah the Merciful 
answered, "One, who is just to himself." 

The second right is that no Muslim should ever 
be hurt by his hand or by his tongue. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) once asked his Sahaba-, "Do you know 
who a Muslim is?" They answered respectfully, "Only 
Allah and His Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) know it the best." He replied that 
a 'Musulman' is that person of whose hands and 
tongue nobody gets hurt." Then they enquired from 
him. "And who is a 'Momin'?" He replied, "A 'Momin' 
is that person due to when others may find their life 
and property secure." Then they asked, "peace and 
blessings of Allah be> upon you, which is a 'Muhajir'?" 
He replied, "That person is a 'Muhajir' who quits the 
bad." He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
elucidated, "A Muslim should not cast a hurtful glance 
at an other person. 

"A Muslim should be careful to not to make a 
sign or gesture before others which may create a doubt 
or fear in their hearts." 

"A Muslim should not do or say anything which 
may intimidate others. 

On the contrary, a Muslim is a source of 



567 

comfort for others. I saw a person strolling happily in 
the rose gardens of 'Jannat' (Paradise). I was told that 
he had seen a massive tree obstructing the path of the 
pedestrians and he had taken pains to fell it away from 
the narrow passage." 

The third essential right is to not be haughty 
and arrogant with others. Allah does not like the proud 
and the profane. The 'pride hath a fall.' 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) informed the people that I was advised 
by 'Vahi' (Divine revelation) to tell you "to not to be 
proud and pompous but to behave meekly and 
sedately with others." The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) used to be Rehmat 
i e. Blessing personified with every one. He used to 
help the poor, the needy, widows and the orphans all 
the time. 

Takabbur' (Arrogance) Ss 'Zulme Kabir' i.e. a 
great menace. Hence, one should not look down upon 
people Such a conceited person, forgets himself to 
such an extent that at times he casts a contemptuous 
glance on a 'Vali in plain attire and meets his nemesis 
in no time. 

The fourth right is not to resort the backbiting of 
a brother Muslim. A backbiter is an untrustworthy 
villain. He needs to be curbed at the outset. The man 
who listens is a pious person. A backbiter who speaks 
ill of other persons before you, can soon find ways to 
speak ill about you to others and disturb peace and 
tranquility prevailing among the faithful. 



The fifth right is that no brother Muslim should 
iin dis-acquainted with a brother Muslim for more 



568 



than three days. The Holy Prophet (peace and 

blessings of Allah be upon him) has specially stressed 
upon it. It is dignified and decorous to be the first to 
greet the other. Hazrat Akrama (peace of Allah be 
upon him) used to repeatedly tell the people to be 
merciful and forbearing with others quoting the 
example of Hazrat Yousuf Alai as Salam (peace of 
Allah be upon him) that Allah had informed him that 
"I have made your name and status illustrious due to 
your great tolerance of the grievous atrocities of your 
brothers and ultimately forgiving them." It is also in the 
'Hadith' that "Allah will raise your status and give you 
respect, if you forgive the sins and transgressions of 
your brother which have caused you pain and suffering 
in life." 

The sixth right is to trypeace and be good to 
others whether they be good or bad. It is in the 
'Hadith' that after the unsurpassed virtue of 'Eiman', 
the next prized possession is for the ('AqP) -wet-ration 
to guide the man to be charitable to all and have 
malice for none. 

Hazrat Abu Huraira (Allah be pleased with 
him) said: If anyone caught the hand of the Holy 
Prophet (Peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) for 
talking to him, the later did not make an attempt to 
get it released till the former himself had not released 
it. During conversation he paid full attention to him 
and observed complete patience till he completed his 
talfe > 

The seventh right is to respect the elders and 
the seniorspeace and be kind, considerate and 
affectionate to the juniors, specially the children. 



569 



The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has advised His Ummah:- 

A. "That Allah has sanctioned respect for the grey- 
haired elders. He likes them." 

B. "Since Allah has given respect to the grey- 
haired people, My 'Ummah' should pay them 
the respect due to them, an account of their old 
age. When they grow old, Allah will grant them 
respect, in lieu. 

"A person who does not pay respect to the old 
and does not love children, will never be sent to 
'Jannat'." 

"The prayers of the elderly people for those 
who give them respect for their old age are never 
wasted. These prayers have' miraculous effect." 

"People used to present their small children 
before the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) . At times He used to make them sit on 
the horse back with him to the delight of the children 
and their parents. It used to be a rare sight. Some of 
them used to be so fortunate as to sit in front of Him 
and some at the back. The face of the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) used to be 
wreathed in smiles. Every one present used to envy 
these children. Each one of the elderly persons used to 
say, "Alas, I am not a child to day. If I was, I would 
also have taken my turn with these blessed children." 
On his part the child sitting in front of the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
used to say to the other, "I am luckier than you. I was 
sitting in front. You were sitting at the back." In turn 
he used to retort. "Nevertheless 1 was also sitting with 



570 



him (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him)." 

The eight right is to behave cordially with 
people. A courteous person with an amiable tongue is 
easy to deal with. 

One day an elderly lady respectfully blocked the 
way of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) and insisted on His immediate 
indulgence. He asked her to sit and wait for Him at 
the end of the lane. He (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) returned soon, sat with her for a while 
and listened to her attentively. 

A man's word is his bond. The nineth right lie| 
in honouring one's word. A pledge broken is a trust 
shattered. It is in the 'Hadith' that three things signify 
that a person is a 'Munafiq' (A double dealing 
treacherous person) . 

A. A liar 

B. A person who does not keep his word 

C. A usurper. A malefactor who misappropriates 
entrusted property. 

The tenth right is to pay due regard and respect 
to a person according to his status. The greater the 
status of man in the community,, the more should be 
the honour accorded to him. 

Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa (Allah be pleased with 
her) was in transit enroute to a distant place. Meals 
were placed on the 'Dastar Khawri' (The dining cloth) . 
A beggar ('Faqir') happened to pass by. She asked her 
servant to give him some food. In the meantime, a 
well dressed rider arrived on the horse back. 



571 



Thereupon she diverted her attention to him when He 
paid her his respects. A person remarked, "We hold 
you in high regard. We are surprised to note that this 
well to do looking person appears to have been 
preferred to the poor beggar." She replied, "No. The 
intention was not to, God forbid ignore or belittle the 
poor man. The idea is inconceivable. Actually my 
attention was intuitionally diverted to the man on the 
horse back. You should appreciate that the need of 
the beggar was not more than a loaf of bread or two 
which was being provided to him but it would have 
been bad manners not to pay regards to the man on 
the horse back according to his apparent status. He too 
was like a guest." The Faith too demands, and dictates 
all faithful to up V?ep the norms of good behaviour 
and pay due regard and respect to a caller according 
to his obvious station in life. The hospitality and 
courtesy claim such conduct. It does not verge on 
flattery, or on being overawed by the riches or the 
glamour of the guest, for it is a very uncharitable act to 
humiliate a person." 

She said that "the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) does so Himself. Not 
infrequently, ambassadors and other dignitaries from 
outside and other places call on Him and He (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him)' treats them 
according to their position in life." 

"One day an old lady who had fed her milk to 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) came to see Him. He stood up respectfully, 
spread His personal 'Chadar' for her to be seated on 
and said with his voice vibrant with emotion. "Mother, 
It is a singular honour for Me. Command Me how I 
can serve you?"; She kept quiet. Nevetheless, He did 
not hesitate for a moment and gave her all his share of 



572 



the 'Male Ghaneemat' (Booty of war won) which had 
per chance only then been apportioned. The good 
woman was touched and sold it to Hazrat Usmane 
Ghani (Allah be pleased with him) for ten lack 
dirhams. 

"The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) remarked one day, "Why should 1 
not tell you something which is better than saying 
'Namaz' (The prescribed or defined prayers), 'Roza' 
(Fasting for Allah) and 'Sadqa' (charity)?" People were 
all eager. He said, "It lies in bringing peace and amity 
between the faithful by uniting two Muslims who are 
annoyed with each other." 

Hazrat Anas (peace of Allah be upon him) has 
stated that one day he and Hazrat Umar (peace of 
Allah be upon, him) were respectfully seated before the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) . They noticed that He was smiling. Hazrat Umar 
asked him humbly, "peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon you, may we know why you are smiling? He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) replied, 
"Two persons would fall headlong before Allah on the 
Day of Judgement. One of them would entreat for 
justice saying that the other person has caused him 
much harm. Allah would ordained that person to give 
him his right. He would reply in turn. "On Allah 
Almighty, all my good deeds have been snatched away 
from me by various claimants. I am left with nothing 
now." Thereupon Allah would enquire of the second 
person of the status and say he has no good deeds to 
his credit now. Then the second person would answer. 
"In that case *my bad deeds may be given to him 
instead." Yet the matter would not be settled. 
Thereupon Allah would instruct them to raise their 
heads. To his utter astonishment the aggrieved person 



573 



would see palacious houses made of gold and silver 
with invaluable gems and pearls studded in them. He 
would exclaim and ask, "Do these palaces belong to 
some prophet, martyr or 'Siddiq'?" Allah the 
Beneficienet would reply. "These unique houses would 
be the property of that person who would be able to 
pay for them." He would humbly ask, "I do not know. 
But who can pay for them?" Allah would say, "You 
can pay for them if you like." "How, " he would ask 
entreatingly. Allah would say, "By forgiving your 
brother Muslim." Thereupon he would cry out, "Oh 
Merciful Allah. You are Beneficent! I forgive him all his 
sins." In this sublime Mercy Allah would order. "You 
are pardonedpeace and blessed. Both of you, go to 
the Paradise hand in hand." After that the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "Have fear of Allah in your hearts. Reconcije the 
separated souls of His humble servants. Allah will 
himself reconcile them on the Day of the Judgement. 

The twelfth right is that a Muslim should conceal 
the shortcomings and drawbacks of the Muslims from 
others and at the same time be up and doing in their 
eradication, individially and collectively. It is in the 
'Hadith' that those Muslims who do so, will be amply 
rewarded. In turn, Allah will conceal their faults and 
give them respect. 

Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq (peace of Allah be 
upon him) used to say that "Whenever a thief or a 
miscreant is nabbed I keep on praying in the hearts of 
my heart that he is reformed and his vices are not 
exposed somehow, by the mercy of Allah." 

One day the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) addressed some 'Nau Muslims' 
(New entrants in the Faith) and advised them, "Now 



574 



that you have recited the 'Kalimae Tayyaba', have it 
penetrate into your souls so that you are protected 
from the menace of picking up holes in otherspeace 
and backbiting. You should also be guarding of the 
heinous habit of trying to find faults in your brother 
Muslims." 

One day a thief was produced before the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him). 
His hand was to be cut off. Seeing the face of the 
Holiest of the holy, where pain and anguish was writ 
for the man, the people asked their Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) respectfully. "Has 
it hurt you?" He replied, "Why not? I too do not wish 
to join the Satan in his enmity of the faithful." So, 
indeed lucky are those whose sins remain comouflaged 
and get reformed before the punishment in lieu is 
levied on them. However, it should be borne in mind 
that the stringent punishment for the defaulters levied 
in the Faith is to eradicate the evil, .rootpeace and 
branch. There is no concept of aiding and abetting the 
evil. Treachery is the hallmark of the devil. 

Hazrat Farooqe Azam (peace of Allah be upon 
him) used to roam around the streets of the metropolis 
in disguise. One night he heard sounds of music on 
'Barbat' (An Arabian stringed instrument) coming out 
from a house. He perched on the adjoining wall and 
saw a man drinking and making merry with his maid 
servant. Hazrat Umar Farooq (peace of Allah be upon 
him) told the man, "Do you think that you will get 
away with this scounderly act and Allah will conceal 
it?" He respectfully replied, "Ya Amirul Momineen 
(On, Head of the Faithful) I beg of you to consider 
what I am humbly submitting. I have indeed made an 
error but you appear to be committing three. Allah has 
said in the Holy Book." 



575 



(U:0>;i*Jl) ....I'jlUJJ 
And do not spy.... (49 : 12) 

So come to the houses by their doors. . . . 

(2 : 189) 

You perched up the wall of my house and entered my 
house. 

(T V : jjlit) ^^a'J^ 

Do not enter houses other than your 
houses, until you ask permission, and 
salute the people thereof.... (24 : 27) 

And you never took permission to enter my 
house. Nor did you convey 'Salam' (Greetings) to me 
as prescribed by Allah. Hazrat Umar (peace of Allah be 
upon him) asked him, "Alright. If I pardon you this 
time do you promise to never do so?" He gave his 
word of honour, asked forgiveness of Allahpeace and 
became a refined person. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) once told his audience. "Beware. It is a 
bad habit. An eavesdropper will be severely dealt with 
on the Day of Judgement. Molten lead would beg 
poured into his ears for this felony." 

The thirteenth verity lies in not casting a slur on 



576 



a man. To besmirch the good name and honour of a 
person is a terrible scourge. 

Under suspicion, aspersing one's brothers in 
faith, irrelevant chatting irresponsible talk, 
contemptuous conjecture and exaggerated address 
against one's brothers, all fall in this category and are 
deplorable. 

One day, the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) was heard saying, 
"What would you say of that person who abuses his 
parents?" The audience respectfully enquired, " 'Ya 
Rasoolullah' (Oh, Holy Prophet of Allah) (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) you, who is such a 
person?" He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) replied, "It is that person who calls the mother or 
father of another person bad names. With the result 
that they abuse his parents in turn. Is it not tantamount 
to his abusing his own parents?" 

It is in the 'Hadith' that once the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) was talking 
to his wife, Hazrat Safia (Allah be pleased with her). In 
the meantime a new comer happened to pass by 
them. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) called him and told him, "She is my 
wife." Hazrat Safia (Allah be pleased with her) said "no 
one can misconstrue anything about you 'Ya 

Rasoolullah'. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) answered, "Beware, the Satan 
circulates in the body of men like blood in their veins." 

One day Hazrat Umar (peace of Allah be upon 
him) pulled up his hunter, when he saw a man talking 
to a woman in a deserted ravine. He quickly bowed 
before him and apprised him " 'Ya Ameerul 



577 



Momineen' She is my wife." Hazrat Umar (Allah be 
pleased with him) still punished him and said "Why 
don't you hobnob with her where no one may see 
you?" 

The fourteenth 'Haq' lies in the propriety that if 
Allah the Beneficient accords a high stature and power 
to someone, he should live upto it. 

(i) He should be correspondingly helpful to others, 
in turn. It behoves a good man to be humble 
when he is highly placed. 

(ii) The greater his status the more meek and well 
behaved the man should be with others. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) used to say, "Do not hesitate to come to 
me for anything you desire. At times, I want to give 
something to you on my own but I prefer it when 
someone puts in a word for somebody, if he feels the 
least shy to ask for it himself." He (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) also used to say at times that 
"there is also much merit in 'Sadaqae Zubani' i.e. 
charity by words." People used to humbly ask "What is 
such Sadqa." He (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) used to elucidate that "it comprises verbal 
attempts to save the life of someone, to protect 
someone from torture or to be of general benefit to 
someone for his good, to please Allah." 

The fifteenth 'Haq' is equally as important viz if 
a brother Muslim sees or hears a brother Muslim being 
ragged, maligned or misrepresented by others in his 
absence, he should stand up for him and advocate his 
cause in absentia. He should act as his 'Vakil', his 
pleader. It becomes all the more essential for him to 
do so if he finds that a miscreant is on, to cause 



578 



damage to the honour or property of his brother in 
faith. It is in the 'Hadith' that 'as one sows so shall he 
reap. The harvest of such veritable cultivation of the 
good will bring eminence to such a person and protect 
his 'Jan-o-Mal' and 'Abroo' (Honour) in this world and 
in the hereafter by the mercy of Allah." The 'Sahabae 
Karam' used to say often "that an evil tongue put 
behind the teeth in time saves many an innocent heart 
from being wounded by its sharp edge." 

The sixteenth 'Haq' comprises of the verity 
patience in man to comport himself with dignity before 
a highhanded person in power. To lose one's temper, 
return a rebuke with a rebuke only aggravates things. It 
is therefore of the essence not to be lacking in paying 
regards and respects to the man in q uestion so that he 
is kept mollified, as far as possible. Hazrat Abdullah 
Bin Abbas (peace of Allah be upon him) has explained 
the meaning of the following verse of the Holy Book 
that 'One should pay back the evil by good by saying. 
'Salam' to the offender courteously. 

(© t : jcuail\) ... jwJu '£>'* j& J 

And they avert evil with good.... (28 : 54) 

It was related by Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa (The 
venerated wife of the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) that once a person 
approached the 'Sahabae Kiram' and asked for 
permission to see the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him). He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) condescended to see 
him despite the fact that he had the reputation of being 
a very evil person in his people. The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) greeted 
him courteously. Hazrat 'A'isha (Allah be pleased with 



579 



her) was astonished. When he left she asked the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
way you extended courtesies to him I thought he was 
a man worth the honour. Yet, you gave him advice on 
certain things firmly? The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) replied, "He deserved 
the honour due to his position but he also needed to 
be told things for his betterment as he was basically not 
a good man. Indeed that person will not be worthy of 
being forgiven by Allah on the Day of Judgement who . 
may be partial towards a tyrant and treacherous person 
to save his own skin." 

It is also in the 'Hadith' that it is not short of 
giving 'Sadqa', if a man manages to protect his honour 
against an evil tongued savage person, with dignity 
and fortitude. 

Once Hazrat Abu Darda (peace of Allah be 
upon him) remarked in a sombre voice. "It is very 
painful that at times people have to laugh per force 
majeure in the company of some powerful despots 
when actually their hearts are actually crying and 

cursing them for their own helplessness and offenders 
brutality." 

The seventeenth 'Haq' (Propriety) lies in making 
friends with the 'Fuqara' (The poor and destitute) and 
keeping at distance from the TJmara' i.e. the rich and 
prosperous, as far as possible. Once the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) remarked, 
."Avoid the company of the dead." On enquiry of the 
listners" He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) replied, "I mean the arrogant 'Uma'ra'." 

Prophet Solomon i.e. Hazrat Sulaiman Alai Uas 
Salam (peace of Allah be upon him) was wellknown 
for his special affinity for the poor. As soon as he used 



580 



to see a poor man, he used to unhesitatingly sit on the 
barn of the road or anywhere on the wayside with 
him, and used to hobnob with him like a bosom 
friend. He used to say, "a 'Miskeen' is sitting with a 
'Miskeen' (Poor and needy person)." He sincerely 
loved these simple, deprived persons from the core of 
■his heart and used to say that. "I like the name, the 
word 'Miskeen' the most." So much so that the Holy 
♦Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
used to pray, "Oh Allah, I want to live like a 'Miskeen' 
;and die like 'Miskeen'." Similarly in response to a 
query to this effect (Prophet Moses) Hazrat Moosa Alai 
Uas Salam (peace of Allah be upon him) said that "if 
you wish to find Allah, go to the poor and the down 
cast." 

The eighteenth right lies in perpetually striving 
for the happiness and the well being of the Muslims. 
The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has said. 

"A Muslim who occupies himself in bringing 
comfort and happiness to his brothers, lives to earn its 
elegant recompense in this world and gets doubly 
blessed when he dies." 

"A person who takes pains to kindle the light of 
happiness in the eyes of a Muslim by his selfless service 
to him, will find his eyes aglow with the 'Noor* 
(Blessed illuminating light bestowed by Allah) of the 
Beneficient on the Day of Judgement." 

"To help a 'Mazloom' (A victim of atrocity) is 
entitled to being blessed seventy three times over, for 
the virtue of the good deed doner" 

"A person who does not feel the pain of a 



581 



brother Muslim in his heart is not one amongst us, in 

My 'Ummah' (community)." 

Hazrat Maroof Karakhi (Rahmatullah Alaih) a 
wellknown venerated saint of his time once told his 
friends that a person who recites the following prayer 
thrice, daily will attain the status of an 'Abdal' (A 'Vali' 
of exalted status) . 

O Allah! Reform the Ummah of 
Muhammad. O Allah! Be kind to the 
Ummah of Muhammad. O Allah! Grant 
expansion to the Ummah of Muhammad 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him). 

The twentieth virtue lies in the 'Haq' of 
conveying 'Salaam' (Greetings of peace and tranquility 
for the other) to the other, as soon as a man sees him. 
Once a person entered the company of the Sahaba-e- 
Kiram but forgot to say 'Salaam' to them. He also did 
not notice the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon hirh) who was sitting at the far end. The 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) observed it and asked the person to go out, come 
back again and say 'As Salamo Alaikum' (Greetings 
and peace be on you), before speaking to them. He 
apologized humbly and did so. 

Hazrat Anas (Allah be pleased with him) has 
related that when he was eight years old he went to 



582 



pay his respects to the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) for the first time. "The 
Holy Prophet kissed me and said, Try to remain neat 
and clean as you are, so that you may live long and 
do not forget to say 'Salomo Alaikum' to people when 
you meet them so that your ('Naikies') good deeds 
may increase many fold." • 

"When two friends greet each other sincerely 
and shake hands with warmth of feeling, seventy 
blessings of Allah are distributed between them." 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that "One should pay one's 
respects to people, with grace. To bow down before 
anyone or to stand with one's arm folded like a vassal 
is not good." 

The twentith 'Haq' lies in ministering to the sick. 
The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) used to do so and has said that 'a person 
who goes to enquire after a. sick person does a good 
deed. And a person who perpetually serves the sick 
out of a feeling heart will go to (Mannat') Paradise. 
Seventy thousand angels pray to Allah for him." It is 
better to place the hand on the forehead of a sick 
person of the same sex and utter the following prayer. 

In the name of Allah, the Beneficient, the 
Merciful. I seek refuge for thee with Allah, 
the One and the Only, the Independent, 
neither begets nor begotten, .nor any one 
else is equal to Him, from the evil that you 
feel (in yourself). 



583 



Hazrat Usmane Ghani (peace of Allah be upon 
him) has said that once when he was sick, the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
called on him several times and recited the same 
prayer. It is also a 'Sunnat' to recite the following 
prayer for a sick person. 

I seek refuge by the Honour of Allah and 
by His Power from the evil 1 feel. 

Also, it is not proper to resent the enquiry of a 
person who calls on the sick to enquire after his health. 
It is in the 'Hadith' that two angels are assigned to a 
sick person to see how the sick man treats the people 
who come for his 'Ayadat' (Enquiry after the health of 
a sick person). They see, whether he is grateful to the 
man. or is ungratefully annoyed. 

It is the saying of Hazrat Ali (Allah be pleased 
with him) that "if a person has stomach ache, he 
should buy some honey with the 'Mehar' of his wife. 
He should mix rain water in it and drink it. He will get 
well soon, Inshallah." The thesis is that the water of 
the 'Bwane Rahmat' (the blessed rain showers) mixed 
with the Money of Mehar (given in 'Bakhshish' (A 
present) by the wife to her husband and the honey 
which has inherent values of cure as per Holy Qur'an, 
intermingles to make it a medicine of rare efficacy to 
the ailing person." Simultaneously, the sick person 
should not bicker over his sickness. Nor should the 
ailing man be impatient. He should consider the 
sickness to be 'Kaffara' of his sins, instead. The man 
who goes for the 'Ayadat' of the sick person should 
conduct himself well. 



584 

A. He should not sit for long with the sick person 

B. He should not pester the sick person or his 
attendents with the details of his sickness. 

C. He should pray for his early recovery and look 
concerned with his welfare. 

D. He should remain attentive to the patient and 
not say irrelevant things. 

E. He should happily render whatever service he 
can for the treatment of the sick person, as far 
as it is possible for him to do it. 

The twenty second right is to go with the burial 
procession. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) has said that 'the person who goes 
with the burial procession will get a reward equivalent 
to one carat of gold £nd the person who waits till all 
burial rites of a deceased person are completed will get 
two carat gold worth of 'Ajr' on the Day of 
Judgement. Each carat of gold in both instances will be 
equal to the Mount , Uhad' (Famous mountain where 
battle was fought between the faithful and the 
dissenters). The decorum of this gloomy occassion 
comprises the following vital elements. 

A. The man should refrain from frivolous 
behaviour like laughing, casually chatting with 
others etc. 

B. On the contrary, he should try to think of his 
own death some day and learn a lesson from it. 

Hazrat A'amash (Allah be pleased with him) 
once described his own experience. He said that one 
day he participated in a funeral procession. He 
observed the people walking with him. Each one of 
them looked so solemnly morose that he did not know 



585 

who to condole with. Their sympathy was sincere. 
Each one acted as if the loss was his. One of them 
praised the deceased after the burial rites and said, 
"After all the day has come. He has got rid of three 
agonising eventualities. He has seen the face of the 
'Malikul Maut' (The angel of death), tasted the bitter 
cup of death and absolved himself of the fear of 
death." The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) has said that "when a man dies 
three things viz his friends, his 'Mai' and his 'Amal' 
(The performance) follow him. The friends and his 
assets remain behind. Only his deeds keep him 
company." 

The 'Haq' comprises not forgetting the dead. It's 
verity lies in the man remembring that he too has to 
die someday and learn its moral of the story viz life is 
transient. That he will also have to lie in a grave under 
the earth. Therefore every person should make it a 
point to go to the graveyard for ('Ziarate Quboor') 
paying homage to the departed near and dear ones off 
and on, pray for their 'Maghfirat' (Redemption) and 
remain akin to the factum of life and death. 

Hazrat Sufyan Sauri (Rahmatullah Alaih) used 
to say that "a good man never forgets his death. It 
prevents him from sin. For him death is a foregone 
conclusion, pre-concieved. Hence when he dies, his 
grave will become one of the cherished gardens of 
Paradise. Vice-versa the negligent will find that his 
grave is a dark, dismal dungeon of hell." 

, » Hazrat Rabi Bin Khaysam (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
was an eminent saint of the class of the Tabieen'. His 
tomb is in Toos' (A city in Persia). He had got a grave 
dug in the backyard of his house. Whenever he used 
to feel the least negligent of the hereafter he used to 



586 



go and lie down in the grave. Those who had seen 
him do so have said, that after sometime they used to 
hear his voice from the grave saying 'Oh Allah, grant 
me some respite. Send me to the world again so that I 
may make amends for my follies.' Then he used to 
come out again and get absorbed in prayers and 
worship chanting 'Oh Allah, when I finally do go to the 
grave never to return to this world, let me have no 
regrets of having been unmindful of you'." 

The rights of the neighbours are in addition to 
these vital duties. The right of the neighbour is 
manifest and unquestionable whether he may be a 
Muslim or a non Muslim. According to the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) "A 
'Kafir' has one 'Haq' and a Muslim has two 'Haqs' on 
his neighbour'. And a neighbour, who is a relative and 
also a Muslim has three 'Haqs' jaccording to Faith." 

It is a saying of the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) "one day Hazrat 
Jibrail Alai his Salam (The venerated angel who used 
to bring revelations of Allah to the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) was so 
absorbedly eager about the rights of the neighbour to 
me that for a moment I thought that he is going to end 
up by saying that he has even a right on our property 
and possessions." The following sayings of the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
should remain permanantly engrained in the heart and 
mind of every Muslim. ' 

" 'Haqqe Hamsaya' is a proverbial term.' Both 
words go together. Hence the right of one's neighbour 
on his neighbour is unquestionable. This right has a 
('Hurmaf) consecration." 



587 



"A neighbour who is in distress on account of 
his neighbour is not a Muslim. He will never be sent to 
'Jannat' (Paradise)." 

"Hitting the dog of a neighbour is tantamount to 
hitting a neighbour." 

"A man was praising a lady and saying that 
such and such lady is very pious and a devoted 
worshipper of Allah. She keeps fasts during the day 
and worships Allah all night. The Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) enquired from 
him. "Are her neighbours happy with her?" He 
hesitatingly replied, "No. She is quarrelsome with her 
neighbours." The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) immediately said, "In that case she 
will be sent to Hell." 

"A minimum of forty houses around you are 
your neighbourhood." 

"A neighbour who feels unhappy and unsafe 
due to the 'Shar' (the mischief) of his neighbour is like 
an unprotected person in a castle. His aggressor is a 
treacherous foe. He will never find the sanctuary of 
•Jannat'." 

It does not only mean that a neighbour should 
not be harassed. It also signifies how important it is for 
a neighbour to look after his neighbour is every way. 
As a matter of fact a neighbour is a fore runner of 
happy augry to his neighbour in every thing. 'Say the 
word and the thing is yours' used to be the dictum of 
our worthy ancestors for their neighbours." 

"On the Day of Judgement, a neighbour will 



588 



address his bad neighbour and ask him before Allah 
'why did you make my life miserable in the world?' 
"The defaulting neighbour would be askened of 
himself." 

"The house of a person was infested with mice. 
Somebody suggested to him to keep a pet cat at 
home. He shook his head ruefully and replied, "I 
wanted to do so but abstained from so that the mice 
may not go-over to my neighbours house." How can I 
like that for my neighbour which I do not like for 
myself." 

"One day the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) asked somebody, do 
you know what is the right of a neighbour?" He kept 
respectfully quiet. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) told him that if the 
many rights a neighbour has over his neighbour the 
following are the most redeeming. 

A. "Help him when he is in need of help, 
monetory or otherwise. 

B. Minister to him in sickness. 

C. Serve the household of the neighbour in case of 
death in his family. 

D. Try to share his happiness and sorrow as far as 
possible. 

E. Do not enlarge the walls of your house so much 
that he may suffer for want of fresh air and 
sunshine. 

F. Send your estimable neighbour gifts of fruit and 
other refreshing things when you take them 
yourself. If you may not afford to do so, 
partake of them surreptitiously. 



589 



G. Try and see that your neighbour is not nagged 
by the smoke from your house. 

H. Never peep into the house of your neighbour 
from your roof top. 

I. Don't throw dust before your neighbours door 
steps. 

J. Don't jam the water outlets of your neighbour. 
K. Don't ever cast a glance at the ladies of the 
neighbour. 

L. Don't make a noise, so that your neighbour is 
not disturbed." 

As regards the right of one's relatives on him, 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has said, "Allah the Merciful has said that "I 
am 'Rehman' (One of the great names of Allah); Part 
of its beneficience of 'Rahm' (Mercy) is singly allocated 
for benevolence to the man's relatives by Him. A 
person who is magnanimous to his kith and kin, his 
parents, his own family, his brothers and sisters and 
others related to him by ties of blood, benefits from My 
'Rahm' due to the kindness he dispenses to others for 
My sake." There is great virtue in 4 Sila Rehmi' 
(Kindness) and vice in 'Qata Rehmi' (Cold 
bloodedness). The former goes to 'Jannat'. The later 
goes to 'Dozakh'. 

THE RIGHTS OF THE PARENTS 

Their status is lofty. Hence, their rights are also 
euqally paramount. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has advised that:- 

"The right of the parents on their child is even 
greater than the reward of 'Namaz', 'Roza', 'Ha]' and 
'Umra' if a person serves them truly according to what 



590 



their stature demands, without forgetting Allah." 

"A disobedient child will never be able to taste 
the sweet smell of the rose gardens of Paradise due to 
his 'Qat'ae RehmiV 

"A child who keeps on giving 'Sadqa' (charity) 
on behalf of his old and infirm parents serves both his 
parents and himself." 

One day a man came to the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) and 
said, "Ya Rasoolullah (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him), My parents" have died. Kindly advise me 
what right do they have over me, now?" The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
told him. 



A. Say your prayers, recite the Holy Book and 
pray for their 'Maghfirat' (Redemption). 

B. Pursue their 'Wasiyat' (Prediction of the good) 
and honour their worthy commitments. 

C Behave with respect with their friends. 

D. Treat their relatives amiably. 

E. Follow in their footsteps of virtue. 

F. The right of the mother is twice that of the 
father," 

. _ ., c . 0ne dau Prophet Moses i.e. Hazrat Moosa Alai 
Uas Salam (peace of Allah be upon him) informed his 

5f l-V* L a ! " l !? ave been a PP ris ed by Allah by his 
Wa h that he will put the names of all those people in 
the list of criminals, who will cause pain or grief to their 
parents," 



591 



THE RIGHTS OF THE 'CHILDREN' 

(Sons and daughters vis a vis their parents). A 
man went to the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) and humbly asked, "Ya 
Rasoolullah (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) with whom should I perform 'Naikies' (Good 
deeds : Selfless service)?" He (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) replied, "With your parents." He 
said, "They have died." Thereupon the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) said, "Do 
good to your children. In the same manner as the 
parents have a right over their children, the children 
have a right on their parents." Some of the important 
rights of the children are that:- 

(i) That the children should not be disowned by 
the parents on trifles and flimsy grounds. 

(ii) Hazrat Anas (peace of Allah be upon him) has 
said that when a child becomes seven days old 
a good name should be chosen for him and his 
'Aqeeqa' (offering in gratitude for a child) 
should be performed. The child should be 
taught good manners when he becomes six 
years old and when he becomes nine years old 
he should be provided a separate bed. The 
child should be strictly ordered to perform 
'Namaz' when he becomes thirteen years old. If 
necessary, he may even be slapped. He would 
become eligible to get married at the age of 
eighteen. He should be told in so many words 
that, "We have brought you up, to this age, 
taught you the difference between the good and 
the bad and have performed your 'Nikah' (Holy 
wedlock). Now, we seek deliverance of Allah 
from all that may be abject in you. We have 
performed our prescribed duty." 



592 



(iii) Parents should take care to treat all their 
children equitably, barring the fact that the samll 
children are always more likeable for their 
innocence. It is a blessful thing to kiss a small 
child. It is also a 'Sunnat'. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) used to kiss his grandsons Hazrat Imam 
Hassan Alai Uas Salam and Hazrat Imam Hussain Alai 
Uas Salam. It is a great responsibility to bring up 
children. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) Uas said, "Allah blesses the 
parents who manage to bring up their children in such 
a way that they remain away from the 'Na Farmani' 
(Disobedience) of Allah." 

Hazrat Afrah Bin Habis (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
who used to remain absorbed in prayers, never found 
time to ever kiss any of his nine sons. One day when 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) said so in a 'Khutba' (Address) that 'the 
man who is not merciful to others will never be graced 
by the mercy of Allah', woke up with a start muttering 
his regrets and rushed home from the mosque to make 
amends as soon as the prayers were over. 

One day the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) was sitting on the 'Minbar' 
(Raised platform in the mosque for addressing the 
faithful). He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) came down hastily to pick up Hazrat Hassan Alai 
Uas Salam as he was toddling up the stairs of the 
'Minbar', taking a toss here and there to reach Him 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him). He (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him); embraced and 
kissed him affectionately, and made him sit in His lap. 



593 



Then He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
recited this verse from the Holy Book. 

(T A : JUM) v&^i ify} m fl\y\Xrt 

In fact your wealth and your children are a 
trial (8 : 28) 

One day the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) was in a state of 'Sajda' ; (Lying 
prostrate in humble servitude before Allah). Little, 
Hazrat Imam Hussain Alai Uas Salam came and went 
up on His reclining back. He (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) on His reclining back. He (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) extended His 
'Sajda' interminably till he got down. It was a 
wonderous spectacle. The 'Sahabae Kiram' (Allah be 
pleased with them) thought that the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) is raptly 
immersed in receiving 'Vahi'. They were enraptured 
when the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) informed them after the prayers that 
"actually Hazrat Imam Hussain Alai Uas Salam had 
made Him his horse and He (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) did not consider it proper to 
relinquish his charge on his mount." Nevertheless, on 
the whole, there is far greater stress by Allah on the 
rights of the parents on their children as compared to 
the rights of the children on their parents. The 
Almighty Allah has accordingly ordained. 

Thy Lord has decreed: you shall not serve 



594 



any but Him, and to be good to P^*£ j 

It may be noted with care here that Allah has spoken 
of dig respect and regard to one's parents together 
w^th the hurible submission to Him in His worship and 
veneration, in this verse. . 

Their pre-eminent position vis-a-vis their 
children, is marked by the opinion of the Ulema. 

m All 'Ulema' are agreed that the offsprings of 
parents should not ' undertake any journey 
without their permission unless it be a Farz . 

(H ) So much so that a certain school °f thought 
W believes that if ever the parents of a child offer 
something to eat to their children which may be 
•suspect' but not 'Haram', they should take it in 
difference to them. 

Going into finer details, the 'Haq' of the eldest 
brother is near to the Haq of the father, spec* after 
h s demise. For that reason, it is in the 'Hadith hat 
me 'Haq' of an elder brother over his younger brother 
is like the 'Haq'of the father on the son This applies 
paSy to the eldest brother, after the death of 
their father. 

THE RIGHTS OF THE SLAVES (BOTH MALE 
AND FEMALE) 

Referring to them i.e. the 'Laundi' (Hand- 
maiden) and 'Ghulam' (Male Slave : M^ tl S ^ nt ^ 
Soly Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 

him) has said: 



595 



A. "Always have fear of Allah in your heart for 
your slaves. 

B. Give them to eat what you eat yourself. 

C. Give them to wear the same, as you wear. 

D. Don't be hard on them. Don't ask them to do 
things which they may not be able not do. 

E. Be kind to them. Do not humiliate them. They 
deserve your love and sympathy. They are your 
dependents. You could have been in their 
place. 

F. If they are not of much use to you or if you are 
afraid that you will not be able to look after 
them properly, hand them over to somebody 
else for what you have paid for them. Set them 
free. It is the noblest of all." 

Somebody asked Hazrat Ahnaf Bin Qais 
(Rahmatullah Alaih), "How did you attain such 
patience and prudence?" He replied, "From Qais bin 
Asim (Rahmatullah Alaih). One day his 'Laundi' 
(Female Slave : Servant) brought roasted lamb on stick 
for him. Unfortunately, it indavertently slipped from 
her hand and fell on Hazrat Qais' infant baby. The 
child died on the spot. The maid got so scared that she 
fainted on her feet. Hazrat Qais Bin Asim 
(Rahamtullah Alaih) brought her to her senses, told 
her that it was no fault of hers and- set her free." 

Whenever the slave of Hazrat Aun Bin Abdullah 
(Rahiiimulbh Alaih) used to be lacking in following his 
instructions he used to say to him, "you too are 
becoming negligent of your duties to your master as I 
am to my Master." 



596 

One day Hazrat Abu Masood Ansari (peace of 
Allah be upon him) heard a voice calling him 
suddenly, when he was thrashing his slave for grave 
disobedience. He looked back he was shocked to find 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) was addressing him. The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) said, Ya 
Aba Masood, beware, your Master has more 
command on you than you have power over your 
slave." 

The 'Laundi's (A hand maiden : A female slave 
or servant) right is greater than that of the 'Ghulam 
(Male slave or servant) . 

1. She should be well fed and well clothed. 

2. She should be treated with care for her sex. 

3 No one should look down upon her. The 
master should keep his 'Master and slave 
relationship with Allah in mind alwayspeace and 
be kind to her. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has observed that 'when your assistant 
takes pains and prepares food for you, it behoves you 
to have your meals with him. In case it may not be 
possible to do so for some unavoidable reason, you 
should at least dip a morsel of bread in the curry and 
put it into his mouth and ask him to eat it. 

CONFINEMENT AND SOLITUDE 

There is a difference of opinion between the 
'Ulema 1 (Plural of Aalim : The learned) whether it is 
better to lead a solitary life or to live in unison with 
people. Hazrat Sufyan Sauri, Hazrat Ibrahim Addham, 
Hazrat Dawood Tai, Hazrat Fuzayl Iyaz, Hazrat Ibrahim 



597 



Khawwas, Hazrat Yousuf Asbaat, Hazrat Huzaifa 
Mir'ashi and Hazrat Bashar Hafi (Allah bless them all) 
and some other elite saints are of the view that it is 
better to lead an isolated life for piety. In antithesis, a 
class of 'Ulema' and some other eminent 'Buzurgs' 
have the opposite view. 

According to a 'Rivayat', Hazrat Ibne Seereen 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) is of the opinion that solitude 
means undisturbed worship of Allah. 

One day an admirer of Hazrat Dawood Tai 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) asked him to give him some 
valuable advice. Hazrat Tai (Rahmatullah Alaih) said, " 
'Fast' from the world in such a way that in your 
abstension from it, you may not break your fast till the 
time of your death. Run away from people, as people 
flee from the humdrum of the city to the quietitude of 
the jungle in desperation sometimes." 

Hazrat Hassan Basri (Rhamtullah Alaih) once 
dwelt on this subject in these words, "It is in the 
Torait' (Torah) that 'contentment makes the man rise 
above wants and desires'. When a person isolates 
himself from people he get rid of avarice, jealousy and 
many other complications. He finds peace and 
tranquility. . People start respecting him. He becomes 
immune to the evil. 

According to Hazrat Wahab Ibnul Wasd 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) "there are ten parts of wisdom 
and sagacity, nine of them are concerned with silence 
and the tenth in meditation and worship." 

Hazrat Rabee Bin Khaysam (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) and Hazrat Ibrahim Nakh'i (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
advocate to acquire 'Ilm* and remain away from 



598 



people. 

Hazrat Malik Bin Anas (peace of Allah be upon 
him) used to go and meet his friends, he also used to 
go to enquire about the condition of the sick. People 
also used to see him attending funeral rites of the 
deceased but all of sudden, one day he severed all 
relations with every bodypeace and became a recluse. 

Hazrat Fuzyal (Rhamtullah Alaih) had become 
so reconciled to lonesome life in prayer that he used to 
say "I feel immensely grateful to that man who forgets 
to say 'SalanY to me. I prefer my solitude to his 
greetings. Likewise I do not want that anyone should 
come to enquire after my health and welfare if I am 
sick. 

Hazrat Sa'ad Bin Abi Waqas (Allah be pleased 
with him) and Hazrat Saeed Bin Zuhud (Allah be 
pleased with him) and Hazrat Saeed Bin Zuhud (Allah 
be pleased with him) went and found solitary corner in 
a place called 'Aqeeq' near 'Madinae Munawwara' until 
every body had almost forgotten them. One day it was 
learnt that they had died there one after the other, 
quite sometime ago. 

Once a ruler extended his hand of friendship to 
Hazrat Hatim Assam (Rahmatullah) beseeching his 
companionship and asked him respectfully if he could 
be of any service to him. He replied, "I would rather 
like that I did not see you and you did not see me, 
for there is no greater virtue than to be alone and in 
peace." 

An admirer entreated Hazrat Suhal Tastri 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) for his companionship. He asked, 
"When one of us dies who will be his companion?" He 



599 



replied, "Allah!" Hazrat Tastri (Rahmatullah Alaih) said 
"Then why should each one of us not remain with 
Him?" 

The question of 'Nikah' is also co-related with it. 
Some are in favour of it. Others prefer ascetism. 
Hence, let us consider its merits and demerits. 

The first advantage of leading a secluded life is 
that thereby one can occupy one's self in *Zikro Fikr* 
(The remembrance of Allah) exclusively without 
interruption, to ponder over the wonderous creation 
of the things in .the Heaven and earth, by Allah, the 
Creator Supreme, to get submerged in His single 
minded worship to the excluslbn of all else in absolute 
seclusion is a boon of the first order. The company of 
people and divergent stimuli of worldly affaris are great 
empediments in such an illustrious undertaking. The 
entanglements of life are so complicated, yet at times 
very alluring, therefore dangerous. One is likely to 
become negligent of the very essence of life once one 
gets engaged in its pursuits. Even the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) spent a 
considerable portion of his life in 'Ghare Hira' (The 
famous cave in the Hira mountains near *Makkha-e- 
Mukarrama' where the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) used to go for prayers 
and meditations until the responsibility of a grandoise 
prophethood was bestowed on Him by Allah the 
Beneficlent. Yet, thereafter, whereas His body used to 
be in the 'Makhlooq' (The people of the world) His 
heart and soul used to remain perpetually engrossed in 
the 'Yad' (The remembrance and worship) of Allah. 
Only once He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) expressed the desire that if ever He decides to 
have a friend He would chose Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq 
(peace of Allah be upon him), It was a glowing tribute 



600 



to a 'Siddiq' by the most pre-eminent in both the 
worlds of Allah! 

The verity of singular attachment to the 
'Marafat' of Allah, in an isolated place where nothing 
may deter the pious from their chosen path has been 

displayed by the aforementioned 'Aulia-e-Kiram' whose 
status and nearness to Allah is undisputed. It's essence 
is an overwhelming and exclusive adoration of Allah. 

Even in ordinary life we have seen people go 
mading in captivating the love of their 'Mahboob' (The 
Adored). They forget everything else and the very first 
trait that develops in them is that they start seeking 
solitude. Hence those who venerate Allah, worship 
Him whole heartedly, do nothing strange to want to be 
alone with Him. After all the very perpose of life is to 
worship Allah, seek His nearness and happiness. These 
'Aulia-e-Kiram' grow humbler and humbler doing so. 
The Satan tries to find an easy prey to them by trying 
to icw that seeds of pride of their piety in their minds 
but finds himself hopelessly defeated, as no other 
thought remains in their minds except that of their 
'Mehboob' i.e. Allah the Merciful. As a matter of fact, 
it is He, who frustrates their evil designs and 
onslaughts against his friends. One day a "Buzurg' 
asked a 'Vali', "What have you gained by leading an 
isolated life?" "The love of Allah." He replied and 
added. "In fact I am not alone. I remain before Allah. 
Whenever I wish to say something of some mystique 
to Him I start saying my prayers and when my heart 
desires that He should speak to me, I start reciting the 
'Torait' (The Holy Torah' ordained on prophet 
Moses)." 

Somebody informed Hazrat Hassan Basri 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) of a man who used to live a 



601 



lonesome life behind a large pillar in an isolated place. 
Hazrat Hassan Basri asked the man to let him know 
when he comes out of his refuge. Thus, one day he 
got the opportunity of asking him why did he lead a 
lonely life. He also asked him why he did not meet 
him some times. He'replied, "I feel an overbearing 
weight on me. Every moment that passes, 1 get to 
know more about . my worthlessness. The weight 
increases. I bow down further in humble servitude 
before Allah asking for His mercy. Each time He 
bestows a favour on me and I thank him profusely for 
it. This unique phenomena remains in progress all the 
time. I have no regrets." Hazrat Hassan Basri was most 
impressed and said, "Don't you worry about meeting 
Hassan Basri. You are for better than him. May Allah 
bless you more." 

One day Hazrat Hassan Bin Jehan 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) called on Hazrat Ovais 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) and said, "I have come to pay my 
respects to you for finding some solace in your 
company." Hazrat Ovais replied, "You are welcome, 
but in my opinion the company of Allah is far better 
than the company of man." 

Hazrat Fuzyal (Rahmatullah Alaih) used to say, 
"When the night sets in and it gets dark my heart gets 
illuminated with the thought of being alone in privacy 
with my beloved. However the advent of dawn makes 
me morose as I know that now people will start 
coming to interrupt our rendezvous." 

One day Hazrat Malik bin Dinar remarked to his 
friends, "Which is better, to be speaking to Allah the 
Merciful humbly when no one else is present or to be 
talking to the people of the world about worldly affairs 
in tasteless discourse with no end or purpose? Open 



602 



the eyes of your heart and see the splendour of Allah's 
'Marafat' before they become blind on account of 
permanant of no use." 

The second virute of leading such singular life of 
dedicated faithful service to Allah, uninterrupted in 
solitude also safeguards man from sins. 

A. Thus, the man is protected from evil talk. 

B. Saved from bad company which is corrosive. 

C. Attains contentment. Overcomes avarice. 

D. And is a source of no bother to others. 

The third benefit lies in being absolved of 'Ria'. 
The man remains self contained and away from 
duplicity and treacherous acts. The dirt of the world 
does not make him dirty. Lust and lechers acts go un- 
abated. 

One day Hazrat Ibne Masaood (peace of Allah 
be upon him) gave advice to one of his admirers and 
said that "the less you intermingle with people the 
better it is for you. You may go out to meet a beloved 
friend, overpraise his virtues, cause him inadvertent 
damage and return home as the foe of your friend, 
and a sinner." 

Once Hazrat Sirri Saqti (Rahmatullah Alaih) said 
that "When a friend comes to see me and I am 
innocently combing my beard with my hand I get the 
fear of my life lest I should be behaving like a 'Munafiq' 
(A ; hypocrite)." 

Similarly, an admiier of Hazrat Fazeel 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) came to pay his respects to him, 
started fawning on him and praising him. As Hazrat 
Fazeel (Rahmatullah Alaih) did not want to tell him to 



603 



go away from his hamlet be covered his face and ears 
with a thick coarse cloth and remained confined in this 
condition till he had left him. 

One day Hazrat Hatim Assam (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) called on Hazrat Hamid Laffof (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) and asked him, "How are you?" He replied, "I 
am apparently alright. But I will come to know of the 
real status after I have crossed the 'Pulsarat'." 

Hazrat Isa Alai Uas Salam (Holy Christ) once 
replied to such a query and said, "How can I tell you 
of how I am, when I have no power over what is good 
for me and I can not cope up wjth what is harmful to 
me. One can only try and I am doing it." 

Somebody enquired of Hazrat Rabi Bin 
Khasheem (Rahmatullah Alaih). "How are you?" He 
replied, "I don't know. I'll come to know of it when I 
die." 

A man asked Hazrat Abu al-Darda (Rahmatullah 
Alaih), How are You?" He answered, "Only when I 
am saved of 'Dozakh' (Hell) I will come to know that I 
am alright." 

Some one asked Hazrat Ovais Qarni 
(Rhamtullah Alaih), "How are you?" He answered, 
"How can I answer such a question. In the morning I 
don't know if I am going to make it till the night. At 
night I am not aware if I am going to live till the 
morning." 

A friend asked Hazrat Malik Dinar (Rahmatullah 
Alaih), "How are you?" He replied, "How can you ask 
such a question from a person whose life is decreasing 
steadily and his sins are increasing rapidly?" 



604 



Similarly, when a person asked a sage, "How 
are you?" He replied, "I am ashamed of myself. Don't 
ask me this question. I take the 'Rizq' (Livelihood : 
Food for existence) provided by Allah but follow the 
orders of His enemy, the Satan." 

A man asked Hazrat Muhammad Bin Wasit 
(Rahmatullah Alaih), "How are you?" He replied 
"Consider the plight of that person whose desires are 
unlimited and life very short and has no assets for the 
'Akhirat'." 

People asked Hazrat Hassan Bin Sinan 
(Rahmatullah Alaih), "How are you?" He replied, "I 
don't know how to answer your question. I am still' far 
away from my destination. My life is not worth the 
Day. I don't know how I am going to account for my 
deeds on the Day of Reckoning." 

One day Hazrat Ibne Sireen (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) asked a friend, "How are you?" He replied, 
"How can such a person answer a question of this kind 
who is under debt of five hundred dirhams and has 
nothing with him to feed his family." Thereupon 
Hazrat Ibne Seereen (Rahmatullah Alaih) went home, 
brought a thousand dirhams and gave them to him; 
five hundred to enable his friend to pay off his debt 
and five hundred dirhams for his family and said, "I 
have resolved never to ask anyone, how are you." 

In the olden days, unlike now the practice used 
to be to genuinely enquire about the welfare of a 
person if they ever asked him *how are you? Oixr 
ancestors used to rally round if the person was in any 
distress. That is why is those days this question was not 
asked casually, at random. At times, people were seen, 
want only not wishing the other, pretending that they 
had not seen him. They were afraid to confront those 



605 

in apparent straits because they knew that they were 
not in a position to help them. On their part, the 
people in distress also used to understand their discreet 
behaviour and used to never beckon to them and ask 
for help. Everything was upright and above board, an 
unwritten code of conduct prevailed. 

Reverse is the case now. The sincerity and 
sympathy of people for their brethren is on the decline 
and vain questioning about other's affairs is on the 
increase. It is not uncommon now to even enquire 
about whether the other has cooked a chicken at his 
house and if only a dirham be required by the other 
the same is never forthcoming. Courtesy and kindness 
have become extinct and a thing of the past. If such 
goings on do not sow the seeds of disunity in the 
Muslim brotherhood, what else will? 

The fourth unseemly element is that the 
company of undesirable people is likely to impair the 
morals of those who come in contact with them. Not 
infrequently, the good are likely to be considered at 
par with the bad. It is also likely that if some day like 
the 'Eid', an 'Alim' happens to wear a silk robe, he 
may be branded a hypocrite, whereas the same man 
may himself be a mischief monger of the worst type. It 
may end up by the backbiter being tolerated and the 
'Alim' being condemned. 

In fact backbiting is a heinous sin worse than 
that of the blame attributed to the 'Alim'. As a matter 
of fact casting aspersions on the others behind their 
back is more blameworthy than 4 Zina' (Adultery). The 
true virtue lies in remembering others with good words 
when they are not present. 

Hence, the saying of the Holy Prophet (peace 



606 

and blessings of Allah be upon him) should be 
remembered. 



"Allah showers His blessings when we 
speak about the pious people." 

The pious people lead an elegant life. There is 
always so much to learn from their veritable life. Their 
commendable acts set an example for others and lead 
them to 'Deen' (The Faith) in comparison to 'Dunya', 
the world and its vain pursuits. Just as a person's 
meeting with such pre-eminent persons imparts 
blessings on him, the society of the evil makes him 
cursed. 

Sometimes, such venerated sages epigrams are 
like rare pearls in an oyster. Once a saint gave a word 
of advice to his disciple and said, 'son, do not waste 
your time and energy in the company of people who 
may apparently not be doing any harm to you, but at 
the same time be of no good to you. For instance, if 
you sit near a smithy without any purpose for long- for 
example near a black smith, your hands may not be 
singed but you are likely to get up black all over with 
the ash and iron particles, for nothing, whereas if you 
make friends with a wise person you will gain so 
much. So, why not sit with a perfume seller and come 
back fragrant. Don't you think it is better to be alone 
than alloyed?" 

Summum bonum a man of Allah shows the 
way to Allah and a devil's disciple urges a man, on to 



The company of an 'Alirn' is like a treasure 



607 



trove. It is educating and adds so much to the 
knowledge of the man. He who seeks, finds. 
However, there are some misguided person who 
prefer to pick holes in an 'Alim', instead. How can 
they acquire 'Ilm' when they purposely refrain from 
going near a minerva of learning? 

This is as far as a real 'Alim' is concerned and 
not a so called 'Alim'. A genuine 'Alim's' postion is 
generally established. There can however be a 
difference of opinion, sometimes. But an honest error 
should be taken with a grain of salt. The entire Ilm' of 

the 'Alim' does not become ultra vires. He should not 
be branded. Rather, it can serve as his kaffara 
(Recompense) . 

Secondly, if an 'Alim' states what is obvious, 
like, if he says that taken liqour and adultery are 
'Haram', it does not mean that because it is also in 
your 'Ilm', there is no efficacy in what he has stated. 
For good conduct, it applies as much to you as it does 
to him. Any one can commit such an error and suffer 
for it, but there is always so much to learnpeace and 
benefit from. Knowledge is like a large unfathomable 
sea. For a people to be near the sea and remain 
without a shell even, is very unfortunate. 

The story of Hazrat Moosa Alai Uas Salam (The 
Prophet Moses) and Hazrat Khizar Alai Uas Salam is 
there in the Holy Qur'an to # give the lie to such 
dissidents. When Hazrat Khizar* Alai Uas Salam bore 
the hole in the ship, Hazrat Moosa Alai Uas Salam 
objected to it, unawares of what Hazrat Khizar Alai Uas 
Salam knew. Hence, solitude has its virtue, in this 
context. 

The third advantage of leading a cloistered life is 



608 



that it protects the man from the quarrels and 
altercations of life. That is why, once Hazrat Abdulla 
bin 'Amr bin al-'Aas remarked that it is advisable for 
people to protect themselves from strife and added 
that the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has said that "when you see people 
roaming around outside, grappling each other's hands, 
dont move out, remain silent, keep yourselves to 
yourselvespeace and be unconcerned with them." 

Hazrat Abdullah Bin Masood (Allah be pleased 
with him) once quoted the words of the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) that "a 
time will come when the 'Deen' of the people will no 
more remain secure. People will be roaming about 
unleashed, from place to place. No place will remain 
safe. They will go from one left to the other and then 
from one mountain to the other, like a fleeing fox." 

When people asked the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) about this era He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) remarked, 

A. Those would be the times. It would be better for 
people to keep themselves to themselves It 
would be very difficult for them to earn their 
livelihood without committing a sin." 

B. People respectfully asked again, "peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon you but you have 
advised us to perform 'Nikah'?" He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) replied, "In 
those a man's life would be in peril, of his own 
parents, his wife and children or from his other 
relatives. They would criticise and condemn him 
for his inability to provide them things that they 
want, due to his impoverished condition. There 



609 



is food for thought and a word of warning for 
us in this presaged statement of the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him). 

"By Allah. It has become 'Halal' now 
to keep away from ('Makhlooq') people." 

The fourth advantage of leading a secluded life 
is that by doing so one is kept protected from the 
jealousy, backbiting and mischief of people. 

A 'Buzurg' (A senior or aged person) used to 
spend most of his time in the quietude of the 
('Qabrastan') graveyard or reading some good book. 
He used to say, "They impart peace and sagacity." 

Hazrat Nibati (Rahmatullah Alaih) wrote to 
Hazrat Hassan Basri (Rahmatullah Alaih). "I have 
come to know that you intend to go for 'Haj'. I shall 
be grateful if you could kindly make me your 
companion." Hazrat Hassan Basri (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
conveyed his regrets, in reply and said, "It is a long 
journey. We are old friends. I don't want anything to 
happen to mar our friendship." Seclusion also 
safeguards the secrets of people. 

The fifth advantage is that when a man leads a 
secluded life, he remains away from people. People 
expect so much from each other, sometimes what is 
palatable and sometimes what is unwarranted. At 
times, greed takes the better of man. When this 
happens, he is ruined. The Almighty Allah has 
ordained. 



610 



■ ■ ■ •(•+■* ^'jj 1 *i **** U J) iLu* iJuw U 

Do not stretch thy eyes to that We have 
given to some pairs of them to enjoy.... 

^ (20 : 131 and 15 : 88) 

It is in the 'Hadith' that it is better for a poor 
person to remain at a safe distance from the rich and 

the riches of others, lest he should be tempted by 
them. 

The sixth benefit of "Gosha Nasheeni" (Leading 
a solitary life) is that in not being exposed to others, 
one remains well away from the fools and idiots. They 
are a nuisance in themselves. 

People asked Hazrat A'amash (Rahrnatullah 
Alaih), "How did your eyes become affected?" He 
replied, "By seeing the lazy and the indolent." 

According to Hakim 'Jaleenoos', the great sage 
"just as there is a sickness for the body of man, a fool 
is a disease for the soul of man. He is best avoided." 

Once Hazrat Imam Shafai (Rahrnatullah Alaih) 
remarked to an intimate friend of his that "Today a 
fool was sitting by me. All along I felt an uncanny 
weight dwelling on the side of my body facing him. I 
feel better, now that he has gone." 

THE HARM AND DEVASTATION OF SOLITUDE 

There are many matters of this world and the 
Hereafter which can not be fulfilled without the help of 
the others. For instance:- 



611 



(i) The first disadvantage is that one can not learn 
an l Ilm' without meeting others. It is a sin not to 
acquire 'Ilm' and go into solitude. 

(ii) One can not learn all the 'Uloome Shariat' (The 
learning about all aspects of Shari'at) by himself. 
An ignorant person, specially of 'Shari'at' is like 
a blind man. On the other hand to be well 
versed in matters of 'Shari'at' and to go into 
solitary confinement is worse from the point of 
view that it would tantamount to being highly 
miserly if this 'Ilm' is monopolised and not 
conveyed to others. 

Hazrat Isa Alai Uas Salam has said, "A person 
who acquires 'Ilm' should not let it remain confined to 
himself. He should act upon it and impart it to others." 
Naturally it can not be done if the man goes into 
seclusion. Moreover, Ilm' should be attained to lead a 
good and pious life in this world for the hereafter. In 
doing so, who is going to teach the others what to do? 
For instance who is going to inform thern? 

(i) That Taharat' i.e. cleanliness does not consist of 
the mere cleanliness of body and clothes. It 
means far more than that i.e. abstaining from 
the evil and keeping the soul clean, too. 

(ii) That the vital role of the eyes, ears, the tongue 
the hands, has its own significance, for piety. 

(iii) That the 'Kalimae Tayyaba' forms the very basis 
of the 'Deen'. It stresses a solemnity which is 
without parallel. It negates and nullifies 
treacherous traits like pride and avarice, to 
quote only two. Allah has ordained in the Holy 
Book. 



612 



Who has taken his caprice as his god? 

(25 : 43) 

Unless the man becomes aware of the dangers 
and pitfals of life, he can not find safety from them. It 
is the lure and lust of life which is the most menacing. 
Likewise the hatred and anger of man for man 
degrades him to the level of animals. A sage of the old 
days said to his people one day, "we have been living 
in these forests since centuries. Why is it that more 
men have been killed by the man in tribal wars than by 
the beasts of the jungle?" The answer is obvious. It is 
the lust for power, the sickness of self-aggrandizement 
that makes man forget himself. Then comes the filth of 
treacherous minds that pollutes a pious and peaceful 
atmosphere. The germs of its epidemic spread every 
where. That is where the 'Ilm' of the goodpeace and 
bad and how to encounter it comes in handy. If it is 
not learnt and taught, the fibre of society is likely to be 
badly impaired. The Satan is always on the lookout to 
ruin the man. 

Then, there are things like the status of woman 
in her periods and the question of divorcing a woman. 
A woman's life can be ruined by a mistake on the part 
of man. Hence, it is necessary to be well informed in 
all walks of life. Therefore the justification for 'Ilm' and 
'Amal' becomes manifest. 

It is irrelevant whether the man follows Hazrat 
Imam Ab'u Hanifa (Rahmatulah Alaih) or Hazrat Imam 
Shafai (Rahmatullah Alaih). At least the basic 
education is vital, as long as the Talabe Ilm' i.e. the 
seeking of knowledge is not for the world only. It is 
evident that the evil of jealousy, pride and prejudice 



613 

etc. can not be curbed with 'lime Dunya' (The 
knowledge of the worldly affairs) only. The actual 'IlnY 
is 'Ilmul Akhirat' (The knowledge of the hereafter 
which also enables the man to lead a good life in this 
world. 

A news is not like an inspection. There is 
no need of any proof of this claim. 

It follows from the above discourse that it is 
extremely essential for a faithful to fortify himself with 
the 'Ilm' of 'Shariat' and 'Tafseer-o-Hadith' (Knowledge 
of research ,in the tfply Book and the sayings of the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him). Once he has acquired it, he would appreciate 
how blessed he is, and would want to impart it to his 
fellow brethren, also so that they may also become 
similarly enlightened. Ironically, sometimes, even those 
who acquire 'Ilm' for the gains of the world only, 
become beneficial for others in pursuing their 
vocations. The good and the virtuous gain from it 
while he remains blank himself. But, it is an exception 
and not the rule. It can be compared to a candle 
which burns but illuminates its surroundings. 

One day, a man was pompously sitting on a 
'Masnad' (A decorated chair : Ornamented pedestal). 
Hazrat Ali Karamul Wajah saw him and said, "He is 
quiet but actually he is crying out recognise me. See 
my majestic bearing." 

A man asked Hazrat Umar (peace of Allah be 
upon him) why have you asked me not to give advice 
to people?" He replied, "So that you may remain self 
contained and not start thinking very high of yourself 



614 



in comparison to those to whom you deliver sermons." 

Once Hazrai Sufyan Soori (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
told an 'AIim : . "You are doing good job but beware of 
hypocrites who come to you pretending to learn 'Ilm' 
but they do so actually to show off to others. They are 
of no use to you or to themselves." 

It is in such situations that the 'Alim' is placed in 
a quandry. He can neither decline to teach a fictitious 
learner, nor does he want to become a partner in the 
playfulness of his so called student. It is in such 
predicaments that the 'Alim' also gets frastrated and at 
times wants to go into 'Gosha Nasheeni' (In isolation). 
The right thing to do is to be careful and nip the evil in 
the bud. Thus, the 'Alim' would have no qualms nor 
his position would be to put in jeopardy. His 'Kasbe 
Hala!' (legitimate earning of livelihood) would also not 
be affected. 

Also, there is greater merit in exalting one'^ 
'Meiabida* (Struggle : Perseverence) by facing the 
people with their shortcomings and acquiring the virtue 
of patience in correcting and reforming them. 
Otherwise going into 'Gosha Nashini' may tantamount 
to finding the easy way out. An effective medicine 
should not be avoided just because it is bitter. 

'Gosha Nasheeni' sometimes leads to 
ennuipeace and boredom. The isolated worshipper can 
become subject to "Waswases" (Doubts and fears) of 
an uncanny nature. At times, the least relaxation is 
crucial for a person in solitary confinement when his 
heart is not in prayers. He longs for some change, for 
some diversion. That is the time when the company of 
friends may be more useful for him than otherwise. A 
man is left without friends in solitude. He has no one 



615 

to consult or conciliate him. The Holy Prophet (pezce 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) has said A friend 
takes after a friend. He is a source of comfort and 
guidance for his companion." 

A Muslim has a heart of gold. His feeling heart 
makes him share the woes of his brethren more than 
he worries over his own problems. He cons.ders it his 
primary duty to enquire after the condition o sick as 
much as he thinks it vital to participate In the Namaze 
Janaza' of a deceased Muslim ('Namaze Janaza : 
Burial prayers). Despite the stated merits oi 
undisturbed worship by a devotee, he musses these 
vital social responsibilities which are of the essence for 
the faithful. 

Also there is a certain self-centredness in a 
man's isolation from others. The contrast is clearly 
drawn The faithful meet and greet each other 
complacently courting the friendship of each other in 
selZs service whereas the man leading a cloistered life 
ema ns cut off from them bidding fair to be an aloofish 
arrogant person, the last thing to be desjred God 
forbid, if the stage is reached when he starts jinking I 
am a distinguished person. I have discarded th world 
Why should I go to people. Let those who want, come 
to me, he is lost. 

A 'Hakim' (A physician a sage) of 'Bani Israel 
(of the Israelites) was known all over for his wisdom 
and worth. People heroworshipped him. He had 
written three hundred and sixty books on various 
subjects. He became proud of his P r 7 ess /^ 0U W ^ 
that he had become a man of eminent status with 
Allah until one day, when he was informed by he 
Almighty, "I am not happy with your egotism. He left 
nU seclusion immediately, rushed to the streets 
humbly mixing with the people, behaving meekly with 



616 



grateful tf you do not come to see me and I do not see 
you He preached that he had come all the wau ™ 
on the mountain top so that dmdEaT™? F' 
pay ft* respects to^m, Tp^stoZ^Z so° 
hat he may not go spreading his hands before othe" 
for his wants. He used to say, "I do not wish "o °ose a 
stage moment away from the 'Yad' of Allah" Su<-h 
tiSS^ **, M lnded deVoaon b ^o dinar/anl 
SerstSnr,?^' bu * " b "W* 1 ** "°< "ery 

5524 Suw ESIV "\ b ? e ' t0 lead a 3° od * 

th»t «» i 7 .f, •, Hazrat Assam »ko used to say 
that, if I go to 'Dunya', they will not spare me So™ 

ZltZS ** ^ r mi « «S" oCs 

win brand me as a hvDoerite I *k=ji u Ul,,ers 

controversial person aSnT to t whZ^and 

towards those present and said, "You see u,h«n . 
becomes double minded he loses both." 

(Rahma^toAlalh') catffo 

an esteemed 'Buzurge Dm' (An elite "f ft. FalM 

people come to you for Messing* and a?4e bu, 1 ^ 



617 



they go back they look askance at what you say and 
criticise you." Hazrat Hassan Basri (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
replied, "I have probed my conscience. There is 
nothing aggravating in it. People come to me of their 
own accord. I don't shun them. They get only what 
they want. If they can't like it, it is their misfortune. I 
want my Allah and His nearness and happiness. As 
long as he is pleased with me, I have nothing to worry 
about. As for the criticism of people, they don't spare 
the Almighty Allah even, so, what if they speak ill of 
me behind my back." These are the pros and cons of 
the matter. 

PRINCIPLES OF RETIRING INTO SOLITARY 
CONFINEMENT FOR WORSHIP OF ALLAH 

If a man decides to go into solitude, he should 
do so principally with the ('Niyyat') intention of 
safeguarding himself from the 'Shar' (Mischief) of the 
people. He should say to himself 'I have done so to 
find peace for myself so that I may be able to absorb 
myself in the veneration and worship of Allah whole 
heartedly without outside interference." At the 
sametime he should get busy with the remembrance of 
Allah without losing a moment in any diverting 
thought. His dedication to the 'Marafat' of Allah should 
be singular and complete. He should abstain from the 
company of people. He should not allow anyone to 
come and give him news of what is going on in the 
city. If he keeps himself meticulously away from all 
deterring elements, which can only be if he has 
nothing before his sight the 'Marafat' of Allah, Allah 
will help him to remain away from the lures and lust of 
the world. Carnal desires and the cursed calumnies of 
the people will not beset him. The more forgetful he 
becomes of what people think or say about him, the 
better it is for him. If his aim is his 'Akhirat' and his 
friendship is with Allah, he need not seek any friends, 



618 

nor be afraid of any foes. 

THE DECORUM OF GOING ON A JOURNEY 

The 'Safar' i.e. the journey is of two kinds viz 
physical bodily travel or the journey of the soul. The 
'Batini Safar' i.e. the journey of the soul is in the 
extraordinary realm of celestial heavens of Allah. In the 
'Zahiri' travel the man undertakes his journey in 
covering distances bodily in this life. But the journey of 
the soul is unique, in so much that in it the body of 
the man remains in this world but his soul soars high 
towards the 'Malookiat', the domain of Paradise like 
path of the ('Marafat') proximity of Allah. It is a 
journey of enchantmentpeace and blessings of the 
soul, as ordained by Allah in the Holy Qur'an. 

Have they not looked at the dominion of 
the heavens and the earth and what things 
Allah has created.... (7 : 185) 

A person who is not capable of this 'Batini 
Safar' may as well confine himself to 'Zahiri Safar'. The 
difference between the two journeys is vividly marked. 
In the, former, the soul transcends and finds itself facing 
the 'Khana-e-Kaba', while in the later, the body slogs 
along on it's path. 

THE 'N1YAT (INTENTION) OF UNDERTAKING A 
JOURNEY AND ITS PURPOSEFUL DETAILS 

The 'Safar' i.e. the journey undertaken is of five 

kinds. 



619 



The first kind is that of travelling to acquire 'IlnV 
i e. to attain knowledge. In turn the 'Safar' 
(Journey) of this kind is of three categories. If 
such 'Safar' be undertaken because it is a 
'Sunnat' to do so, it is different from the safar 
for a 'Farz'. 

(i) The first category is of 'Safar' made for 
learning the.'Shari'at'. It is in the 'Hadith 
that the man who undertakes a journey 
for this purpose is a blessed person who 
goes out on the path of Allah. He 
remains in His protection until he returns • 
home. So much so that the angels 
spread their wings of blessedness for him. 
In the olden days people used to travel 
for miles to fully grasp the details of a 
'Hadith'. 

Hazrat Sha'abs (Rahmatullah Alaih) has 
remarked that the safar 'Journey^ 
undertaken for even one 'Kalima' 
(Statement) of 'Hadith' has its blessing 
even if one has to travel for it from 
'Sham' (Syria) to Yemen. Vice-versa if a 
journey is undertaken for some worldly 
good based on greed or for some evil 
purpose, it is correspondingly cursed. 

(ii) The second category of 'Safar' is to go 
cut and away to improve one's 'Akhlaq 
(conduct). In such travels the student 
seeks the company of the pious persons, 
'Buzurgs' and 'Auiia Kiram' (venerated 
pious and saints) . 

As long as man remains dormant at 
home he generally believes or makes 
believe that he is a well behaved person 



620 



(Hi) 



bu he sees the light, when he sits in 
enlghtened company. Hazrat Bashar 
Hafi (Rahmatullah Alaih) has said, "that 
if water accumulates at a place it 
becomes stagnant." 

The third category of 'Safar' is to 
venerate Allah by travelling far and wide 
in jungles, mountains, valleys and 
different cities of the world to see the 
varied and wondorous creation of Allah 
He sees how gorgeous every thing 
created by Allah is. He sees that each of 
these superb creations is saying a rosary 
extolling the Greatness of the Supreme 
Creator, Allah the Benefident. Every 
fibre of such a spectator's being also 
starts paying faithful service to the 
Almighty Allah for the bounties conferred 
by Him in His universe. 

^ j i<£ ^' 0. j j g -jg ^ 

How many a sign in the heavens and the 
earth there is, that they pass by, turning 
away from it!.... (12 : 105) 

The dedication of such a scholar ft. 
increases when he ponders over the fvS ^ organs S 
his body how all of them conjoin to give human beings 
the infrastructure supreme, that they possess. 

The second kind of 'Safar* (Journey • Travail «c 
for pilgrimage and worship, to go for «H? or ■322* 
Such 'Safar' is compulsory. To go for 'Umra' is To a 
very venerated journey. a 



621 



To go to pay homage to the shrines of the 
'Sahabae Kiram' and their 'Tabieens' (Pursuants) also 
comes in this category of 'Safar'. To visit the Shrines of 
other elite of the Faith is also very fortunate. It affords 
the pilgrim the ardently cherished opportunity of the 
'Ziarat' (The holy sight) of many esteemed saints who 
usually foregather at such places. To see them and 
meet them is a matter of proud privilege for them. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said: 

"Do not resolve to go for pilgrimage to 
any other place except to the Holy 
Mosques of 'Khaanae Kaaba', 'Madinae 
Munawwara' and 'Baitul Maqdas'." 

(Sahih Bukhari. Kitab Masjid Makkah, 
Bab No. 1) 

It implies and conveys that all other mosques 
are of equal status except the aforementioned three 
most sacred mosques for all Muslims, all over he 
world. However it is in order to visit the shrines of the 
'Aulia Allah' (The venerated saints : The friends of 
Allah). This ruling by the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) does not prescribe 
going there as it does not apply to them undertaking a 
journey to call on the living 'Ulema' and 'Buzurgane 
Deen' (The elite persons of Faith) also falls in this 
category and is auspicious. 

People are sometimes left with no other 
alternative but to leave a place and go some where 
else to save their 'Deen'. When life, property and 



622 



honour becomes at stake, worldly pleasure 
promiscevrty, pomp and show become the order of the 
day R izqe Halal' becomes difficult. Rulers become 
atrocious and people become their partners. Hence the 
pious are left in the lurch. 

To leave one's home and heart is very agonising. But 
the escape becomes necessary. It does provide some 
relief. However, it also becomes troublesome to earn 
ones livelihood (The 'Ri 2q <) but as long as it is 'HalaK 
and there is no promiscuity and persecution, the man 
feels the impact of stress on him. relived to a 
considerable extent. 

Referring to such distressing conditions, Hazrat 
Sufyan (Rahmatullah Alaih) remarked one day that "it 
is better to run away from the sullying scourge of such 
people who happily indulge in things strictly forbidden 
by Faith, if one wants to project his 'Eiman' If the 
comman man of pious thought feels miserable there 
what would be the plight of the elite of faith? "People 
saw him fleeing, carrying a heavy weight on his back 
He warded off enquiries of the people by telling them 
that I am going to such and such village as there are 
better chane Is of my making some more to make both 
ends meet." He added. "A man's 'Deen' remains 
fortified when there is 'Wus'ate Rizq' (Prosperity) " For 

1. -S™ T f aS ° n Hazrat Ibrahim Khawas (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) used to never stay at a place for more than forty 



tradP m 6 \Ta kind °/ ' Safar ' is undertaken for 
trade (Tijarat). Again, such a journey becomes 'Ibadat' 



623 



(worship of Allah) if one tries to earn 'Rizqe Halal' for 
he comfortable but pious life of his family *° that they 
may be able to pray to Allah more devotedly without 
feeling the pangs of want and hunger. On the 
contrary, if the journey is made to acquire aftluence 
worldly CAisho Ishrat') pleasures, pomp and show it 
becomes pedestrian. Greed is never good for Me ft 
has no end. The man should realise that the 'Safar he 
is going on, to amass money, in his lust for getting 
more and more, may actually meet a blunted end 
suddenly if he dies on the way. This is the final 
terminus of a miserly or money grabbing person. He 
gets neither this world nor the 'Akhirat'. Others play 
ducks and drakes with his wealth after his death. 

The fifth kind of travel is for going on a vacation 
or for a change of air. There is no harm in such 'Safar 
if it is made some times with good intentions, without 
any frivolous considerations. But going on regular 
flighty, disgraceful excusions is ignoble. 

In contra distinction there are some 'Fuqara', 
who are 'Boria Nasheen' (Mobile 'dereeishes' who exist 
on poorly rags) who are Gypsy like in temperament. 
They are without home and hearth. They are 
continuously on the move, from place to place for 
enlightenment and access to people of Allah s 
'Marafat' They live a very constricted but contented 
life The rosary, their prayer mat and a few utensils is 
all that they possess and carry them on their backs. 
They go to various 'Ziaraat' (sacred places and seines) 
en route seeking the company of sages and the 
'Soofia' in their 'Safar'. They eat sparingly, always 
avoiding a ('Wasee') large and plentiful 'Dastarkhawn 
(Dining cloth) in their travels. They believe m 
abstaining from the lures of the world. Delicious dishes 
and dashing clothes are an anathema to them. 



624 



It Is however necessary to distinguish between 
them and some people disguising them, purporting to 
LIT ° f W °n h t0 d6Ceive P e °P ,e - Actually such 

X TU ar6 , hke 6mpty V6SSe,s havi "9 "°thlng in 
them. They live on morsels snatched out of the 
Fuqara and pretentiously praise their own self Such 
scoundrels are a slur on the 'Dervishes' and 'A^ia' 

The°sT 1 &!T PerSOnat ? f ° r th f T self -^Srandi Z ement. 
Ihese libertines cause tremendous damage. They are 
devil's disdples. They deserve to be shot dead at sight 
Not only do they asperse others but also bring a bad 
name to the veritable people whom they immitate 
They bring ruin and desolation to many innocent 
person who happens to fall a prey to their villiany 

ZAHIRI 'SAFAR' : NORMAL TRAVEL IN LIFE 

. Following considerations are of the essence for 

The 'Musafir' should pay off all his debts before 
starting his journey so that if he dies enroute he 
may not be in debt to anybody. 

He should return all ('Amanat') things entrusted 
to his care and custody, before starting his 
journey. 

His financial assetspeace and baggage should 
comprise 'Male Halal'. (Bonafide, legitimate 
assets) . 

(iv) He should carry enough funds with him not to 
become bankrupt in transit. He should have 
enough money to be able to entertain a fellow 
traveller on the way as much as to be in a 
position also cater for the 'Fuqara' that he may 
encounter on his journey. 



(i) 

(ii) 
(Hi) 



625 



(v) He should behave courteously with people who 
come in contact with him in his travels. 

(vi) He should try and select such people as his 
companions in his 'Safar' who may be pious 
and thus helpful to him in his 'Deen' (Faith). 
Due to long and arduous journeys, the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) has forbidden solitary travel and has 
spoken of the plausibility of there being a 
'Jama'at' (Party) of at least three people for 
'Safar'. One of them should be their 'Amir' 
(Leader) . It is in the Holy Qur'an that the leader 
should be a pious person having experience and 
wisdom. 

(vii) Before starting on his journey, the 'Musafir' 
should bid farewell to his family members and 
friends and should recite the following prayer. 
The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) used to do so. 

"I entrust your 'Deen', your safekeeping 
and your final end to Allah the Merciful." 

Likewise, the people bidding farewell to the 
'Musafir' should say the following to him, as the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
used to do, for departing 'Musafirs'. 

vi.?- jIaJI di j dJUa jit- j <dli ibij 

- C^-jJ u 

"May Allah reward you with piety. May 



626 

He forgive your sins and may you 
encounter nothing but good, whereever 
you may be headed." 

According to a 'Hikayat' (A parable : An 
anecdote) one day Hazrat Umre Farooq (peace of 
Allah be upon him) was distributing 'Zakat' when a 
man happened to come there along with his son. He 
saw them and exclaimed. "Glory be to Allah! I have 
never seen a son look so much like his father as your 
son does to you. It is extraordinary!" The father 
replied, "It has a strange background viz his mother 
was pregnant. I was about to go on a journey. She 
told me. "You are going on 'Safar' leaving me behind 
in this condition." I had to go. replied to her. 

"I entrust that which is in your belly to 
Allah." 

When I return from the journey his mother had 
died in child birth. Later, one night when I was talking to 
my sympathisers I saw a light glimmering in front, at 
some distance. I asked my friend about the light. They 
said, "This light is from the grave of your wife. We see it 
daily." I was amazed. Yet I recalled that she was a pious 
lady, very punctual of her 'Namaz and Roza (Prescribed 
prayers and fasting). The light persisted. I opened her 
grave. To my amazement a strange lamp was aglow in 
the grave. An undiscernible voice called me up by name 
and said, "You had entrusted this boy to our care. We 
are hereby giving him to you. Take charge. If you had 
likewise also given his mother in our custody you would 
also have found her status quo." 

The fourth important thing is that the 'Musafir' 
should perform an 'Istikhara* (To seek Allah's consent 



627 



and augry before undertaking a thing by prayers made 
to Allah, to this effect) before proceeding on 'Safar'. 
The Musafir should also say four special 'Rakaats' 
(Salutations) of prayer before starting his journey or 
voyage. 

It has been quoted by Hazrat Anas (peace of 
Allah be upon him) that one day a person came to the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) and respectfully said, "Ya, Rasoolullah I intend to 
proceed on 'Safar', shortly. I have written my will. To 
whom should I hand it over to my father, to my son 
or to my brother?" He replied, "Say these 
(Aforementioned) four 'Rakaats' of prayer before 
proceeding on your journey. There js no better 
('Khalifa') trustee for a 'Musafir' than these prayers. 

It is better that before departure 'Soora-e-Fatiha' 
and 'Soora-e-Ikhlas' should also be recited after 
performing these four 'Rakaats of Namaz' along with • • 
the following 'Dua' (prayer): 

fj b D> o'jji *J Uj -Oil 'J l/j 'J 

"I beseech you Oh Almighty Allah to 
make these prayers a source of Your 
nearnesspeace and blessings for us. In 
Your sublime mercy make these prayers 
my assistants and intermediaries for my 
property and family's welfare and 
prosperity till I return home." It is said 

that these prayers keep on taking 



628 

protective rounds, about the house of the 
'Musafir' till he returns home after his 
journey." 

The fifth ('Adab') decorum of virtue Hes in the 
'Musafir' uttering the following words as soon as he 
reaches the door of his house before starting his 
'Safar'. 

"I am starting my 'Safar' with the 
blessed Name of Allah. I trust in Him. 
Only You, You alone have all Might 
and Power over all things. Oh, Allah 
the Merciful I entreat You for Your 
Mercy, against going astray or against 
being misguided. Oh Allah I beseech 
You that I may not commit any 
injustice or tyranny on anybody. Also, 
kindly protect me from the 'Zulm' 
(Atrocity) of others. Protect me My 
Saviour that I may not act like the 
ignorant nor should anyone act 
stupidly towards me." 

And as soon as he embarks on his mount (that, on 
which he has to travel) the 'Musafir' should recite the 
following prayer. 



629 



( i r : J jJi) 'o'j^J uTj J} 

Holy be He, who has subjected this to us, 
though we were not equal to it; and surely 
we are returning to our Lord. (43 : 13) 

Sixthly, it is always better to undertake journey 
on a Thursday. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) used to do so. Hazrat Ibne 
Abbas (peace of Allah be upon him) used to advise the 
intending travellers to start their 'Safar' early in the 
morning, It is a blessed hour when the entire universe 
lauds the glory of Allah. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) also used to do so and 
prayed as follows. 

"Oh Allah, in your gracious Mercy grant 
your 'Barakat' (Blessings) to my 'Ummah' 
on Saturday mornings." 

Later, He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
also said this prayer for Thursday. The eve of 
•Jumaatul Mubarak' (The auspicious Friday) lends 
Thursday its 'Barakat'. In the above prayer Saturday is 
conjoined to Thursday and Friday. 

The seventh important element is concerned 
with the considerations of physical aspects of Safar. 

A. The mount, the animal should not be made to 
carry heavy weight for such a long journey. 

B. The Musafir should never stand on the back of 
the animal. 



630 



C. The 'Sawarf (The animal for journey) should be 
kindly and carefully looked after. The 'Musafir' 
should abstain from hitting the animal, specially 
on its face. 

D. The 'Musafir' should give the back of the animal 
rest from time to time. He should not be riding 
it all the time. Thus both the 'Sawar' (The rider) 
and 'Sawari' (The animal ridden) would both be 
happy. Each taking care of each. For this the 
'Musafir' should walk some distance, off and on. 
The 'Musafir' specially the pilgrim will have to 
account for cruelty to the animal on the Day of 

• Judgement. 

Hazrat Abdul Darwa's (Rahmatuliah Alaih) 
camel died on the way. He started praying "Oh 
Camel, pray do not complain about me to Allah. You 
knew that I used to put only that must weight on your 
back which you may be able to carry with case." 

One day Hazrat Ibne Mubarak (Rahmatuliah 
Alaih) was seated on the camel back. Somebody gave 
him a letter to give it to a certain person at the 
destination. He declined to do so decently and said 
that "I had not included such a thing in my agreement 
with the owner of the camel although this envelope 
has hardly any weight." 

Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa (peace of Allah be upon 
her) has narrated that whenever the Holy Prophet 
(Peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) used to 
proceed on Safar, He used to also keep the weight of 
the following articles in mind . 

(i) The comb 

(ii) The mirror 



631 



(Hi) Tooth Stick ('Miswak') 

(iv) 'Surmadani' (The eyc-rougc bottle) 

(v) 4 Madri' (The hair braid for men to keep the hair 
intact) 

(vi) Rope ;and small bucket (To extract water from 
the well) 

(vii) 'Neharni' (The nail cutter) 

In the olden days the 'Safare Haj* used to be 
very cumbersome like 'Jehad' but the 'Jazbae Eiman* 
(The elevating spirit of dedicated Faith and worship) 
used to keep them inspired all the time. 

The eighth decorum of virtue is contained in the 
'Sunnat' of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) that whenever He used to return 
from the 'Safar' He used to make the following prayer 
on casting the first glance on 'Madinae Munawwara'. 

"Oh Allah the Merciful, make it a 
blessed base for us and grant us chaste 
and honourable livelihood." 

Then He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) used to send someone across to the city to inform 
them of their anticipated arrival in the metropolis. He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) used to 
caution everybody to never go home 
suddenly.unannounced. It is said that some of people 
had failed to follow there instructions and had to see 
unpleasant things at home. 

As a rule, the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) used to go to the 



632 



mosque straight away after 4 Safar'. On reaching home 
He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) used to 
recite the following. 

. ^ 1,1* jiU* Ijjt WjjJ M jf \tjjt 

"Oh Allah the Merciful, I have returned 

(from 'Safar') home begging Your Mercy 
most humbly praying right through for 
the intercession for forgiveness of all 
My Sins." 

It is also a 'Sunnat' to bring gifts for the 
members of the household. It has become an age old 
custom to do so. It is said by the sages that it is never 
good to return home empty handed. Some sort of 
moment, souvenir as a token of one's remembrance 
and love is always, expected and appreciated. ... 

THE 'BATINI SAFAR' : THE JOURNEY FOR THE 
GOOD OF THE HEREAFTER 

It has. since been established that the axis on 
which the matters of Faith revolve in life is the 
'Aakhirat' i.e. on the man's concurrent endeavour to 
gain the 'Ma'rafat' (The cognteance) and the happiness 
of Allah the Beneficent. The man has been sent into 
this world by Him with this specific purpose and in it 
alone lies his betterment. Hence, when the pious and 
the God-fearing people move out, it is always to 
feather their nest, in its light. They go on holy 
pilgrimages. They visit the shrines of the eminent 
saints. They know that, there they are also most likely 
to find the 4 Buzurgane Deen' and 'Ahlullah' (The 
venerated men of Allah : Saints) whose company is an 



633 



Invaluable boon for mankind. These righteous 
'Musafirs' avail this singular opportunity to pay their 
respects to them; collect pearls of wisdom from these 
'Ahlullah', take a leaf out of their book, put into 
practice what they preach and be blessed by their good 
wishes and prayers for them to Allah, to boot. So 
unsatiable in their quest, that they keep on moving 
from place to place. Each time they come across a 
'Marde Saleh' (A pious man of exalted status), they 
foregather with him like ardent scholars and humble 
disciples to better their 'Akhirat'. Yet, if they ever have 
the least suspicion that their journey is fruitless or in 
any way damaging to their 'Deen', they terminate their 
'Safar' and revert back to base forthwith. They are 
loyal to 'Deen'. Their dedication is sincere. Their life is 
meaningful. There is no hypocricy with them. 

These 'Saliheen' (the seekers of the truth) are 
circumspect and are so constituted mentally that they 
give; the regard, the respect, the honour due to these 
'Buzurgane Deen', these 'Auliae Kiram', these 
'Ahlullah' by dint of their esteemed status, instinctively. 
They earn rich rewards in return. Nevertheless it is 
worthwhile keeping certain things in mind, all the 
same. 

A. That the 'Salik Musafir' (The pursuer of Truth) 
should always be the first to say 'As Salamo 
Alaikum' (Greetings) to the 'Buzurg' on whom 
he calls. 

B. He should wait till the 'Buzurg' addresses him 
and should answer his questions briefly in 
simple words without entering into any 
disrespectful discourse or back-chat. If he wants 



634 

to ask a question, he should obtain permission 
for it first. There should not be a word of 
flattery. The 'Buzurgane Deen' don't like it. In 
short, he should be differential and discreet. 

C. In case of a short visit, he should not stay more 
than a night, there. 

D. In normal course, he can spend his time to the 
pleasure of the 'Buzurg' but for not more than 
three days, unless the 'Buzurg' insists on 
extending his stay a little longer. 

The 'Batini Musafir' (The wayfarer in search of 
the truth and the good, for Allah) does so 
nevertheless the point is worth rubbing in, that he 
should not waste a moment- and as such, should 
remain engrossed in purposeful prayers, saying the 
rosary and chanting praise of Allah. Recitation from 
the 'Holy Qur'an' should be his constant Vird' 
(Practice de elite). 

Reverting back, it would be high ingratitude to 
Allah i.e. 'Kufrane Ne'maf, if such a 'Salik' sets his 
foot out of his place of residence, if what he is seeking 
should be available to him, there. 

OTHER IMPORTANT ASPECTS OF 'SAFAR' 
(TRAVEL : JOURNEY) 

A 'Musafir' is one who is in 'Safar' i.e. on a 
journey. He has to suffer the travail of the travel, away 
from his home and hearth, without its facilities and 
comforts. As such, it is in his interest to know the 
provisions of the Faith about 'Namaz', 'Roza', 'Wuzoo' 
and 'Tayammum' inter alia other arduous things in his 
movement from place to place. 



635 



(i) Tayammum' (cleanliness and ablutions in the 
absence or shortage of water) is permitted with 
clean earth. 

(ii) 'Masah' (To touch a part of body superficially in 
performing ablutions) of feet covered by leather 
Jacket long stockings or covering socks is 
allowed. 

As a matter of fact certain 'remissions' are 
allowed to a 'Musafir. 

I. The first 'Rukhsat' (remission) is that the 
'Musafir' can perform Tayammum' due to 
scarcity of enroute, It's details have already 
been discussed in detail in this work. 

II. Secondly, 'Masah' of feet is allowed. First the 
man should perform proper 'Wuzoo' (Ablutions 
before Prayers) and wash the feet properly. The 
stockings or socks may be worn. They, should 
be of leather and not torn. However according 
to Hazrat Imam Malik (Rahmatullah Alaih) even 
a torn footwear is acceptable as long as the man 
may be able to walk with it. 

A. In mobile condition in 'Safar', the 
'Masah' is valid for three days and nights. 

B, But, in dormant state of stay in the 
journey, 'Masah' is allowed for one night 
and one day only. 

It is necessary that before putting on the 
aforementioned stockings or socks, both feet 
should be thoroughly washed. One day the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 



636 



upon him) had put on one sock on His (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) right foot 
and was about to wear the other, when a crow 
suddenly dived down, picked the other sock 
and flew up. He (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) saw that there was snake in it. 
Thereupon the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) remarked, 
"Beware! Anyone who believes in Allah and His 
Day of Judgement should never put on a sock 
without drubbing it first." 

III. Thirdly, 'Qasre Namaz' (Reduction : Halving) is 
permissible, viz two 'Rakaats' (Dogana-Two 
Raka'at prayers) Tare' are to be said for four 
'Rakaats' stipulated in a prayer, by a 'Musafir'. 
However in case of its 'Qaza' (Belated prayers 
offered) four Rakaats should say but according 
to Imam Abu Hanlfa (Rahmatullah Alaih) 'Qasre 
Namaz* means 'qasre Namaz' hence in such a 
case too only two 'Rakaats' should be said. 

Discipline and uniformity are principal traits of 
Islam. Obviously, there can be no 'Qasre 
Namaz' when a 'Musafir' may be standing for 
prayers 'Ba Jamaat' (In congregation behind 
prayer leader-'Imam') with people who are not 
'Musafirs'. To maintain the discipline and 
decorum of such prayers, he will have to say all 
the four Rakats' with others. It can't be helped 
in such a situation. 

IV. The fourth 'Rukhsat' (Remission) is of 'Jama' 
Bainus Sala'tain' (To combine two of the 
prescribed prayers). Thereby, in a journey 



637 



approved according to 'Sharah', the 'Musafir' 
i.e. the traveller is allowed to combine the 
following ('Namaz's') prayers. 

A. 'Namaze Zuhr' with 'Namaze Asr* by 
delaying the afternoon prayers and 
combinig them with the 'Asr' prayers, in 
its early hours. Naturally, the Zuhr 
prayers should be said first. 

B. 'Namaze Maghrib' (Teh evening-sunset 
time prayers) with the 'Isha' (Night time) 
prayers, similarly. 

The 'Sunnat* prayers, as well as the 'Nafal* 
prayers can even be said on the mount while in travel 
i.e. on horse back or on camel back. 

The following procedure may be followed. 

(i) ' First the four 'Sunnats' of 'Zuhr' should be said. 

(ii) Then those four 'Rakaats' should be said which 
are usually performed before 'Namaze Asr'. 

(Hi) Subsequently, after saying 'Azaan' (Call for 
prayers) and 'Takbir' (Allaho Akjbar i.e. Allah is 
Great) the 'Farz' prayers of 'zuhr' should be said 
first. After that the 'Farz Namaz' of 'Asr' should 
be performed after saying the 'Takbir' of 'Asr'. 

(iv) Time lag between the two prayers for the 
Tayyamum' and 'Takbir' should be as short as 
possible. 

(v) After that, those two 'Rakaats' should be said 



638 



which are performed after 'Zuhr' prayrs. 

However, according to the followers of Hazrat 
Imam Abu Hanifa (Rahmatullah Alaih) the 
above system is not in order. Their contention is 
that in the aforementioned eventualities, the first 
prayer should be delayed and combined with 
the next 'Namaz' in its very early hours. 

(vi) As already stated the 'Sunnat-o-Nawafil' arc 
permissible on the back of the animal and even 
to be 'Qibla Roo' (Facing the 'Qibla'). is not 
necessary. However, it is not permissible to 
change the direction, if the 'Sawari* (The mount 
: A horse or a camel, for instance) be already 
facing the 'Qibla' in 'Safar'. The 'Rukoo' and 
'Sajda' is to be performed by 'Ishara' (Making a 
sign) to this effect. It is essential to take care, 
lest the mounted 'Musafir' should God forbid 
come a purler if he bows down too much in 
engrossment in 'Sajda'. 

(vii) It has already been stated that it is the 'Niyyat* 
that matters and it is not necessary to be 'Qibla 
Roo' (Facing the 'Qibla' : The 'Khanae Kaaba', 
the House of Allah in 'Makkah-e-Mukarrama') 
while performing 'Sunnat Namaz' and 'Nawafil' 
while travelling on an animal. However 
according to the sixth 'Rukhsat' (Remission) a 
pilgrim can say these prayers even walking, but 
it is necessary that he should be 'Qibla Roo' at 
the Inception of the 'Namaz' at the time of 
saying the 'Takbire Tahrima* (AHaho Akbar • 
Allah is Great). 

The pilgrim should continue his 'Safar' 



639 



relentlessly against all odds with 'Tawakkal' 
(Blind Faith) in Allah, patience and grit 
overcoming all obstacles and impediments on 
the way, nevertheless taking care to avoid all 
that is dirty for his physical well-being or 
besmirching to his soul. He should act like a 
'Mujahid*. 

Following details pertain to the eighth 'Rukhsat'. 

A. The intention or 'Niyyat' of keeping the 
'Roza' does not remain binding on the 
man, if he proceeds on 'Safar' after that. 
But if the 'Musafir' should be with 'Roza' 
he should not break it. It will also 
forestall its 'Qaza', later. It is better to be 
on safe grounds than sorry. As it is, 
there is difference of opinion on various 
matters like those of 'Qate JumY in 
'Safar' (Withdrawal from Juma Prayers) 
due to presence or non-presence of 
mosque en route, procedure of 'Jama 
Bainus Salateen' (combining of 'Zuhr' 
and 'Asr' prayers also of the 'Maghrib' 
and 'Isha' prayers) and 'Tayammum 
Indal Zuroorat' (Performing of 
'Tayyamum' according to need) and 
'Lawazinat' (Essentialities) of long and 
short journey etc. Also, for instance, 
according to Hazrat Imam Abu Hanifa 
(Rahmatullah Alalh) 'Qasr' of 'Namaze 
Safar' (Prayers in journey) is essential. 

A wise guide, a well informed companion in 



640 



travel or an accompanying 'AlinV can be so much help 
for the 'Musafir's' briefing enroute. Naturally, many 
things are likely to crop during the course of the 
journey where it is necessary for the man to know to 
what to do. The discernment of the correct directrion 
of the 'Qibla', the possible position of 'Masajid' (Plural 
of Masjid i.e a mosque) in transit, the status of the sun 
vis a vis the Qibla at 'Zuhr' and at sunset at 'Maghrib' 
are important matters. At night the position of the 
CQutub') Pole star for knowing the 'Qibla Rukh' before 
'Fajr' prayers is equally vital. That is why it is always 
better to consult the experienced and the cognoscenti 
before starting on a journey. 

'SAMA* AND "WAJD* 

We will discuss the pros and cons of the matter, 
whether 'Sama' and 'Wajd' are 'Halal' or 'Haram' in 
the following two chapters. 

In any case, we have already dwelt at some 
length on the verity of the heart, its unparalleled status 
and its uncanny attributes. It is a many splendoured 
world in its own. The more we delve into its ingenuity, 
the more wonder-struck and mystified we become. For 
instance, it has a singular mystique in it, of reacting to 
the outer stimuli like the 'cause and effect' impact of 
iron and stone with fire. When stone is hammered with 
iron, fire is kindled. It sets a forest afire. Similarly, in its 
'Alame Alavi' which is also called the 'Alame Arwah' 
(The ascending realm of the soul) the heart responds 
to the outer stimuli according to its appeal. It has a 
special affinity to the aesthetic things in the same 
manner. Beauty enraptures it. The more well 



641 



proportioned, well modulated, the more well alligned 
in colour and craft it is, the more fascinating it is. The 
'Husno Jamal' (The beauty) varies. A thing may 
appear just good looking to the senses, it may look 
comely, attractive, pretty, handsome, alluring, 
charming, radiant, exquisjte or aesthetically enchanting 
to the heart, accordingly, depending on it's perceptivity 
or appealing characteristics. 

Similarly, a sonorous voice stirs the heart. At 
times it makes one forget one's self when the heart has 
warm sentiments and in-dwelling love and longing in it. 
Just as breathing on something burning, further 
stimulates its fire. Similarly a man whose heart is aglow 
with the fire of the adoration of Allah is further 
inflamed when he hears melodious praise of his 
beloved. It has therefore been argued that 'Sama' in 
the form of the praise of Allah and His Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) and other 
matters of 'Deen' is Halal for those who love Allah. 
Vice versa it is a deadly poison for those who have un 
godly love for the unchaste, hence 'Haram' for them. 

Those 'Ulema' who consider 'Sama' to be 
'Haram' are 'Ahle Zahir' (Those who have superficial 
outlook) and do not know that the love of Allah 
fountains up, in the heart of man. They believe In 
worldly love of the opposite sexes for each other only. 
Their care for their Creator is cursory. His consecrated 
veneration and adoration is foreign to them. Hence his 
reverence is not instilled in their hearts. They consider 
'Sama' a playful frivolity. Both of these things are 
.'BatiP (wrong). When these 'Ulema' are asked about 
the manifest right of the esteem and admiration of 



642 

Allah; due to His profound benefaction on man and 
about His friendship, who never fails, they look 
askance and retort in words to the effect that "we 
should worship Him and be obedient to Him". Indeed, 
it is true, if these not be mere words but is the 
worship, as it is always sincere and devoted, not love 
par excellence? 

For true assessment of 'Sama' the verdict 
('Fatwa') should therefore be taken from the heart. 
Obviously if a thing is not in the heart, 'Sama' can not 
create it. 'Sama' only stimulates what is in it. In simple 
terms, if a person has something meritorious in his 
heart according to 'Sharah' and he desires to add to it, 
when he hears the 'Sama', he gets further fascinated 
by it. He is rewarded by it. On the contrary, if a 
person has evil in his heart, i.e. that which is 
undesirable according to 'Sharah', he will be punished 
for it. The person who has neither of these things in 
his heart and listens to 'Sama' playfully as he likes its 
melodious aspect, only will be benefited from it only to 
that extent. 

There are three kinds of 'Sama'. 

The first kind comprises listening to 'Sama', only 
for playful entertainment. This is the attitude of the 
neglectful. They also treat life as a plaything, carelessly. 
Nor, for that matter the argument is valid or even 
logical, that since 'Sama' is pleasing it is not good; for, 
all pleasant things are not necessary undesirable or 
'Haram'. Only that kind of pleasure is 'Haram' which is 
sensuous, avaricious, pompous and contemptible 
Surely, the beautiful, sweet smelling flowers, the 



643 



running brooks In meadows and the chirping of birds 
of an early morning is not , Haram\ Indeed, a pleasant 
voice is soothing to the ear as green pastures and 
flower beds are alluring to the eye. In the same 
manner fragrant smell is charming to the nose as the 
delicious food or fruit is enjoyable to the tongue. 
Likewise, words of wisdom are a treasure trove for the 
ration of man. If, as such, the cumulative effect of 
these sensations is so enthralling and 'Halal', then why 
should 'Sama' be singled out and branded 'Haram' and 
undesirable? If all gratifying things are 'Haram' then an 
early morning walk in a garden should be a taboo 
too. ' 

Syeda 'A'isha Siddiqa (peace of Allah be upon 
her) has described that one day the 'Habsfii' (Negroid) 
people were like acrobats in the mosque. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
beckoned to me and asked me, "Do you want to see 
them?" I replied in the affirmative. He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) extended His arm. I 
leaned across it, with my chin on it. The children were 
specially revelling exultantly. So much so that I was so 
absorbed that the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) asked me several times during my 
absorption if I was satisfied. It is an oft repeated 'Sahih' 
(Correct) 'HadithV 

Five conclusions can be deduced from it: 

(i) That, sometimes there is no harm in seeing 
such innocent playful activites. 

(ii) That they were doing so in a mosque. 



644 



(Hi) That when the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) took Hazrat 
'A'isha Stddiqa (peace of Alllah be upon her) to 
witness the rejoicing of these people He (peace 
arid blessings of Allah be upon him) said to her. 

There is an order for such playful activity in it. If it was 
totally forbidden, how could it possibly emanate from 
such an exalted source (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him)? 

(iv) If it was 'Hararri', how could the Holiest of the 
Holy (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) Himself exhort Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa 
(peace of Allah be upon her) to see it? 

(v) .That the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) Himself viewed this 
gladdening scene with interest, for sometime. 
God forbid, how can one- ever conce.ve of 
anything mundane from Him (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) . 

Not only this, Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa (peace of 
Allah be upon her) has also narrated that 'when I was 
a child 1 too used to play gleefully with toys and dolls 
along with my 'Sahelis* (girl friends). The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) used to see 
us playing happily. One day He (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) asked one of my small friends. 
'What is it (the doll)?" She replied, "It is my daughter." 
Then He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
asked her, "What is this?" She answered, "It is her 
flying horse." He (peace and blessings of Allah be 



4 645 • 

upon him) enquired again, "From where has the horse 
acquired the hair and the wings?" Again she innocently 
replied, "Have'nt you heard that Hazrat Sulaiman Alai 
Uas Salam's (Prophet Solomon's) horse had hair and 
wings?" Thereupon the Holy Prophet's (peace and 

blessings of Allah be upon him) face was wreathed in 
smile. It follows from this 'Hadith' that it does not stand 
to the detriment of the holy and the exalted to be 
aloofish from such innocent unsullied spectacle and act 
prudishly. 

Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa (peace of Allah be upon 
her) has also narrated that "one day the 'laundis' (Maid 
Servants) were sitting with me playing on the 'Duff' 
(Arabian leather jacketted musical instrument). The 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) came in and went to sleep in a nook. Meantime 
my father Hazrat abu Bakr Siddiq (peace of Allah be 
upon him) entered the house and rebuked the girls 
saying 'The Holy Prophet of Allah is in the house and 
these Satanic instruments?" The Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings o% Allah be upon him) heard this and 
remarked, "Abu Bakr! Leave them alone. It is 'Eid' 
today." It amply proves that it is 'Mubah' to play on a 
'Duff (Arabian leather jacketted musical instrument) . 

The second kind is that the heart of the listner 
should be filled with evil thoughts and the vocal 
rendering with music should comprise the common 
place or depraved, in singing praises of the physical 
charms of some one describing her modulated body, 
long tresses and other villianous attractions etc. for the 
satisfaction of his sensual craving. 



646 



The third kind is completely different. In it there 
should be something good, something noble, having a 
cherished longing and love for the veritable and 
esteemed and 'Sama' should fortify and activate it in its 
quest to this effect. The following four examples can 
illustrate it. 

A) The singing of the plaudits of the 'Khanae 
Ka'aba' by the 4 Hujjaj' (Plural of 'Haji' i.e. 
pilgrim for 4 Haj') is heart warming. The 'Rajz' 
(The battle hymns) of the Ghazi in their inspired 

* spirit of 'Jehad' for martyrdom in the cause of 
Allah is (Kare Sawab) venerable. 

B) The solemn rendering of the pathetic music to 
purify the soul, to achieve sobriety of 
sentiments, mourning one's evils or to cry one's 
heart out in the agony of love in gratitude to 
the elevated status granted by Allah is soulful. 
In such a state the gravity of anguish, the 
torment is such, as one feels on the demise of a 
near or dear one. The Almighty Allah has 
ordained. 

(tr:.oa»Jt) ....J^flid jki'jl/tsU£) 

That you may not grieve for what escapes 
you.... (57:23) 

However, if a person is aroused to morosity in 
repulsion to what has been ordained by Allah, his 
'Nauha' (Mourning) would be *Haram\ the mourners 
whether paid or otherwise, as well as the wanton 
listeners in such a mental condition will also be sinners. 



647 



C) The third kind is that of the state of happiness. 
It is 'Mubah' (valid) to express happiness over a 
happy thing. The occasion of marriage, valima 
(Post marital party), 'Aqeeqa' (celebrative 
offering on child birth) marks such expression. 
Child birth, of a son also comes in this category. 
The 'Khatna' of the male offspring, or family 
reunion after the return of a 'Musaffr' from a 
long journey too is happily, voiced. When the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) used to return to 'Madina-e- 
Munnawwara* from a journey, people used to 
go mad with happiness. They used to recite the 
following famous verses in mirth leading the 
procession. It used to be a rare sight. 

^ ^ 'jf & W '<& 

"The Full Moon bias arisen upon us from 
the valleys from where the guests are bid 
farewell. Thanks giving has become 
obligatory on us for it that the Caller has 
called us toward Allah." 

Likewise, 'Sama' on the happy occasion of 'Eid' 
is in order. Similarly to listen to 'Sama' on the 
foregathering of the faithful on a 'Dawah' (A party : A 
feast of friends) is valid, for obvious reasons. 

D) The fourth paramount kind is that if the love 
and veneration of Allah reaches that pitch of 
glory in the heart of some devoted worshipper 
that it turns into insatiable ardour, the 'Sama' 
becomes a must for him. It supports and spurs 



648 



his candour. Undoubtedly, such singular 
devotion Is far superior to many 'Nalktes' 
(Good) of normal kind. The 'Sama* of the 
'Soofia' (The venerated worshippers of Allah) is 
of this nature. Of course, this does not apply to 
the present day 'pseudo-soofia' who disguise 
like them but are actually nothing but importers. 
They are Ignorant and have no virtue. We have 
spoken of them before. 

The true 'Asfia' are so rewarded through 'Sama* 
that at times that they get 'Makashif (Revelations) in 
their 'Jazb' (Engrossment). Sometimes, these 
revelations foretell of things from 'Alimul Ghaib' (The 
realm of the unknown in future) by the Grace of Allah. 

The vibrant, enrapturous state of rapt immersion 
in 'Sama' is called 'Wajd\ The listener forgets himself 
and gets transported into an unparalleled realm of the 
grandeur of the soul. Sometimes the frenzy of 'Sama' 
can be unique. 

'Sama' to 'Ahle Safa' i.e. the pure of heart can 

be a source of an ascent to the 'Alamae Arwah'. So 

much so that the *Rooh' i.e. the soul becomes forgetful 

of this world while his physical body remains here. 

Sometimes, the stage is reached when even his body 

becomes darment, listless and incapacitated to the 

extent that he staggers and falls down unconscious. 

This is an elevated status. The 'Huzireene Majlis' I.e. 

the other participants of the 'Sama' are touched by his 

excellence with a growing sense of respect for him. 

* 

Indeed, the genuine 'Soofis' need to be 
regarded and respected. Nevertheless, the times are 



649 

changing now. All that glitters is not gold. Hence, one 
should be guarding of the impostors. The discerning, 
the cognoscenti know more about them. A beginner is 
likely to be taken in by these impersonators. 

One day All Hallaj, one of the disciples of 
Hazrat Shaikh Abul Qasim Gurgani (Rahmatullah 
AlaihK asked his permission for 'Sama'. He replied, 
"Go without food for three days. If, after that your 
heart rejects delicious food offered to you and prefers 
'Sama' instead, then you should consider yourself 
entitled to listen to 'Sama'." That is how the 'Sama' 
becomes 'Mubah' (valid) for some and is likely to be 
hazardous or an excercise in futility for others. 

The dissenters of the status of the 'Asfia' vis a 
vis the 'Sama' and 'Wajd' can thus only be termed as 
the misguided and the prejudiced. They deserve to be 
ignored and sympathised with. How can a blind person 
enjoy the beauty of a garden? Likewise, how can an 
ill-disposed son of a ruler assume charge of a state with 
wisdom and grace when his heart may not be in it. He 
may be absorbed in other divergent playful activities. 
Nevertheless unlike the ignorant, the sensible can 
divine things. They know that seeing is believing. They 
believe in the verity of the 'Asfia' and listen to 'Sama'. 
They are also aware of the condition of 'Wajd* of some 
of them. Consequently, the ignorant non-believer 
maligned with the prejudice of stupidity is the worst. 
For such people Allah has ordained. 



650 



And since they are not guided by it, they 
will say, this is an old lie. (46 : 11) 

The 'Sama' is however not Mubah (Valid : 
Permissible) under the following conditions. 

A) The man should hear 'Sama' in the company of 
men and a woman from a woman. Otherwise, 
if a man listens to 'Sama' from a woman in 
mixed company or a woman from a man in 
mixed company they are likely to fall a prey to 
the Satan. The man should not hear 'Sama' 
from a woman even if she is ugly. Even from 
the point of view of 'Shariat' such intermixing of 
people of opposite sexes (Na Mahrams) is j 
forbidden. 

B) Secondly, 'Sama' to the accompaniment of such 
'Saz' (Musical instruments) as 'Rabat', 'Chang', 
'Barbat' and 'Raud Iraqi' (Traditional Arabian 
and Persian musical instruments) is forbidden. 
They are 'Haram' not only because they are 
inciting to look at but are also unacceptable as 
they are known to have a special appeal to the 
people of wayward ways like drunkards and the 
headonists. Thev are provocative to evil. In 
antithesis the 'Tabal', 'Shaheen' and 'Duff' 
(Arabian and Persian traditional musical 
instruments) are not instruments of this category 
and are not 'Haram', nor there is any forbidding 
order to this effect in 'Sharah' for them. On the 
contrary, 'Duff was played before the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) when marriages were solemnized before 



Him It was permitted by Him (peace and 
Messtogs of Allah be upon him). Abo, whereas 
tephw* of the Tabal' by afflmlnates Is 
ob JusCunsighdy and 'Haram', the legendary 
Ltom of playing the Tabal' by the 'HuBai and 
,he Gharfs (Warriors of Faith) In the battle field 
is befitting. Similarly, the innocent playing of the 
•Shaheen' by the shepherds since times 
immemorial Is 'Mubah'. 

One day the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) heard the sound of Bansar 
(Flute) He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon hun 
R (peace and blessings of Allah be upon h.m) 
Ce" m His ears and asked Hazra. Ibne Umar (peace 

of Allah be upon him) to ^^ 1 " d J^ 
know when the sound stops. As such It Is P'« u ™ a 
uTas he gave a sahabl of HU ^permission **. 
effect, listening to a 'Bansar' is 'Mubah He MmseK 
might have been In a spiritual state wherem He did not 
wish to hear it. 

The strongest argument advanced in favour of 
listening to 'Sama' is that it is conducive to the soul. It 
s£ and provokes the already inherent love and 
deration of Allah In the hear, of the *^ 
and further enriches it's bliss. Nevertheless, a Ine can 
be drawn in the case of that singu ar lover of Allah 
who may be completely submerged in HIs love and 
proximity of Allah. W may matter the leas Ho h m 
or it may even be a source of disturbance o his music 
1, applies equally as much to playing of 'Shaheen in 
such a state. 



652 

The third factor is that it is not 'Mubah' to 
behave in an undignified manner. 

(i) To resort to satire, sacasm or parody of others 
as the •Rafi2is , used to do for the 'Sahabae 

Karam' to the accompaniment of , Sarod\ It is 
'Haram'. 

(ii) To sing love songs in a lustful way, praising the 
beauty of some woman in the company of 
men. However there is no harm in reciting 
poetry, where mention of the beauty of the 
beloved, union with her and separation from 
her are customary. However, the elite of the 
Faith are such grand people that af times, when 
such poetry is being recited, to their lofty minds 
their connotation is completely different. For 
them the beloved can be Allah, the luminous 
face may denote the 'Noore Eiman' (The 
brilliance of the staunch Faith in Allah) and for 
all we know the dark tresses of the beloved may 
signify the dark agonies faced by the soul in its 
recources in the uncanny realms in which they 
travel aloft. A poet has said: 

Hence, it is quite likely that the beautiful dark lock of 
hair referred to by the poet may be taken by a 4 Soofi\ 
in a transdent frame of mind, to mean the unravelling 
of the intricacies of the unknown. At times.the 



653 

unlocking of a single thread of such an enigmatic 
imbroglio may be a complicated problem in the 
wonders of the world. The opening of even a single 
lock of it may mean so much that the poet's flight of 
imagination and his poetry may go abegging. For that 
matter the poetic parlance of the 'Sharab' (The Wine : 
Uqour) and 'Masti' i.e. its alcoholic effect may be a 
banal concept - mundane for a soul fully engrossed m 
the ecstasy of the 'Yad' (Remembrance : Veneration) 
of Allah. 



It is neither relevant nor in order to remain 
simmered down to its earthy interpretation. It is the 
zeal, the fervour, the forgetting of one's self in the 
remembrance of somebody loved, cherished above all 
things that the verity of ardent worship and veneration 
lies. To seek the beloved's pleasure and proximity is 
the ultimate goal. This is the status of the 'Asfia'. 

Hence, when the poetic verses about 'Kharabah' i.e. 
the wine and the pub are confronted, they should not 
be condoned as poetic persiflage, but must be taken to 
mean the 'Kharabi' i.e. the destruction of the 'Deen 
(The Faith). 

The dissidents do not stop bickering. They are 
such people that, whereas they themselves get 
enthralled and vibrantly enchanted in 'Wajd* over the 
sweet tunes of the 'Shaheen', or similarly affected by 
touching Arabic verses. The mere melody affects them. 
The meanings don't touch them. They forget that a 
camel does not understand Arabic or anything of that 



654 



kind but it slogs along carrying a heavy weight on 
distant journeys due to the *WaJd* and rapturous 
euphoria of the 'Hudi Khawn\ the camel rider. And 
when the journey ends, the 'Wajd' stops, the camel 
falls down on its knees. It would be interesting to 
arrange a duel between the donkey and the camel to 
see how they come off in the scurrying struggle. Both 
of them do not know Arabic. Then how come the 
dance in combat and the mirth! 

These bigoted people can be upto anything. It is 
likely that in their antipathy to 'Sarna', they may put a 
completely different construction on whatever is 
rendered in Arabic, for, they are least concerned with 
its actual text (Tafseer'). Like, a person read the 
following line whereupon a 'Sufi' almost went into a 
swoon. 

"I saw nothing in the dream except the 
imaginations of ye." 

When he came to, people asked him about it. He 
replied, "I was overwhelmed by its meaning that all of 
us are helpless!" It is not wrong. Their hallucination is 
of this kind while the 'Wajd' of the 'Asfia' is different, 
each varying according to its assimilation and 
approach. When only the surface is scratched 
superficially, its true worth does not come out. Leave 
aside 'Ishqe Haqqi' (The Divine love), a person who 
has not even tasted of 'Ishqe Majazf (The worldly love 
: physical love), how can he possibly fathom the worth 
of how a truly devoted heart is stirred by the ardent 



655 



devotion of the sublime? 

The fourth consideration is that if a person is in 
the grip of the profane, evil desires . of lust and 
licentiousness, when he hears about the physical 
beauty of women, about their 'Zulf-o-Jamal' the evil in 
him is further aggravated. The more he indulges in it, 
the worse he becomes. 

The pity is that many men, even some women 
are masquerading as 'Soofis' these days wearing their 
customary costum, pretending to be soofis. Misguiding 
people is their forte. They indulge in strange arguments 
to defend the rot. They often speak of love in strange 
terminologies. They say that such and such person has 
got 'Sauda', meaning God knows what, perhaps, that 
he has gone mad over some one. 

Though rather rarely, there is also another 
reason. At times, there is a 'Kashf (Revelation) of the 
'Anbia-o-Malaika' i.e. the prophets and the angels on 
some 'Asfia' in the shape of a very handsome and 
svelte person, like something out of the 'Alame Arwah* 
(The realm of the soul : Celestial strata). For instance 
in the entire Arabia there was no one more 
handsomely captivating than Hazrat Wahih Kalbi 
(Rahmatullah Alaih). That is why it is said that the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) used to see Hazrat Jibrail Alai Uas Salam (Arch 
angel Jibrail) like him. A similar personification like 
the beauteous Amroo is also possible. Hence, it is not 
unlikely that a 'Soofi' may also likewise visualise 
someone in the same manner in a state of spritual 
trance. Hence his special attention towards such a 



656 

person can be understood. 

In short, the 'Soofi' has to tread a very delicate 
and dangerous path. This reference to his crucial 
position is to clarify that actually it is the impostors, the 
make-believe soofis, who undermine the position of 
the 'Asfia' by their villiany. A real *Soofl' is a veritable 
person, "not a villian. The devils who impersonate them 
are to blame. 

Lastly the act of those persons who listen to 
'Sama' out of force of habit just to please themselves is 
'Mubah', provided they do not make it a profession, 
since, if some minor sins are committed over and over 
again, they mount up and become almost tantamount 
to major vice. The example of the revelery of the 
aforementioned 'Habshi' people comes to mind. They 
were not disallowed by the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him). It's repeated 
recurrence and that too in a mosque would never have 
been allowed. An occassional playful spree or light 
hearted banter can be understood and condoned but 
constant cohabitation with the conjurers and jugglers 
can not be tolerated. Nor for that matter can perpetual 
flippancy and frolicsome activities be accepted, for 
obvious reasons. Such persistent defaulter would 
become known as a 'Joker', which is the last thing to 
be desired. 

FURTHER DETAILS OF 'SAMA' 

There are three 'Maqams' viz stages of *Sama' 
i.e. of Tahm' (Comprehension), 'Wajd* (Intoxicated 
state of forgetting one's self) and 'Harkat' (The vibrant 
state of unconscious restlessness) . 



657 



As already stated, the person who listens to 
'Sama' for stupid self-exhiliration or in sensual love of 
someone is a shallow person. To speak to him or 
about him vis a vis sense and sensibility is futile. On 
the contrary, a person who possesses the love of Allah 
and regard for Faith is generally of two kinds. 

A. The first kind is that of the 'Murid', the disciple, 
who is a 'Salik' (A seeker of the truth). Treading 
on this difficult path he remains in a vadlating 
state of hope and hopelessness, part ecstasy - 
part agony, in his career. At times he gets 
overexcited, easily. Being rather in firm in *Ilm- 
o-Aqeeda' (Knowledge and Faith) he remains in 
different states of mind. Sometimes, he 
becomes even so overwhelmed by 'Sama' that 
he inadvertently utterj 'Kufr' (Heretic : Heathen 
thoughts). For instance, he may hear the 
following lines from poetry and commit 
blasphemy. 



It can be in many forms. For instance a disciple who 
traverses the path rather fast in the beginning but lags 
behind later, may erroneously commit sacrilege by 
thinking that Allah was kind to him in the beginning 
but has become annoyed with him, now. Rather than 
correct his shortcomings he attributes his follies to 
Allah. Allah is just and kind. He does not punish 
anyone unfairly, although He is Omnipotent. On the 
contrary, Allah is Merciful and Benefident. His 'Noor' 
(Allah's Calestial light) is manifest everywhere in Hit 




658 



universe. If the sun be shining and person be standing 
behind a wall, he can not say that it is the fault of the 
sun that its rays have not fallen on him. He should not 
forget that he is not basking in the sun as he himself 
was standing behind the wall. The following lines 
depict the position adequately. 

c-^ 1 fiM j.0 i/* /. 

As such, we can easily infer that 'Sama' is 
dangerous for such a person. In antithesis, 
'Sama' adds to the love of 'Jalal-o-Jamal' (The 
splendour and the grandeur of Allah) of Allah 
of a 'Salik' whose status is stable and veracious. 

* It is related that one day Shaikh Abul Hassan 
Noori (RahmatullarT Alaih) dashed forward into 
a sugar cane field in 'Wajd'. His feet were badly 
wounded but he was not the least aware of it or 
affected by it. He felt no pain. This is 'Wajde 
Kamil' (The Perfect 'Wajd'). The 'Wajd' implies 
forgetting one's self completely. It is a fact not 
fiction. It can not be denied. You may refer to 
'Soorey Yousuf in the Holy Book and see for 
yourself how the 'Zanane Misr' (The ladies of 
'Misr-Egypt) totally forgot themselves. They 
were dumb founded and utterly bowled over 
when they suddenly saw Hazrat Yousaf Alai 
Uas Salam (Prophet Joseph). He was so 
handsome that they cut their fingers 
inadvertently with the sharp knives that they 
had in their hands. This is the verity of the 
pursuit of the 'Mara'fat' of Allah. The man is 
there in this world, yet he is so engrossed,. 



659 

utterly forgetful to himself, that he is not there. 
Where? It depends on his status, his position vis 
a vis the realm he is in. When one is thus 
engrossed in the remembrance and reverence of 
Allah his most cherished Beloved, he reaches a 
stage when his own existance is negated - 
nullified to the extent that he becomes near, 
almost akin to the 'Marafat' of Allah. The mirror 
reflect the 'man when he is before the mirror. 
Neither the mirror is a man nor there is a man 
in the mirror. The mystique of the soul is 
unique and not easy to comprehend or explain. 

The second kind relates to 'Mukashifat' i.e. the 
revelations that he starts getting in this 
condition. The 'Sama' scrubs his heart clean of 
all impieties. Once its surface starts shining, the 
mirror of the heart becomes lucidly scrapped of 
all contamination and he starts seeing different 
pictures and facsimiles. The 'Kashf of each 
person varies according to his status. To 
disbelieve this eminent blessing and ordination 
by Allah, on man in his journey of the soul in 
search of Alan's 'Marafat' is tantamount to 
calumny. Woe be to that man who thinks that 
what is not in his treasure chest, can not be with 
an other person. Some believe that even the 
kings do not possess it. In comparison, that 
ignorant person or 'Haasid' (A jealous person) is 
worse who actually possesses little but in his 
arrogance thinks or rather makes believe that he 
is richer than a king. Real 'Wajd' is a fact of the 
first order. It can not be imposed. It is not 
facetious. We have discussed this matter in 



660 



'Ahya-ul-Uloom', the sister volume of this work, 
at some length. 

The second stage is achieved after *Fahm' i.e. 
the comprehension. Then comes the state of 
4 Wajd'. It means change of status from the same 
to the one of non-sensibility to whatever is 
outside of him. There is a complete 
transformation. The status varies from person to 
person. The man uv 'Wajd' wavers and vacillates 
between awe, love, extreme ardency, longing, 
bliss and agony. The fire of love prevails over 
the heart. Its vehemence effects the brain and 
the senses so much that he becomes senseless 
until he is in a trance. He neithter sees nor 
hears. If any sensation is at all left with him, it is 
of quasi-discernment like that of a person in the 
state of advanced intoxication. 

The virtue dwells in a feeling heart. It is in the 
'Hadith' that "when the 'Qur'an-e-Karim' (The 
Holy Book of Allah) is recited before you, if you 
do not cry, your heart should. In any case you 
should lister, to the Holy Book somberly." Your 
face and demeanour should wear a solemnity 
which should be pronounced and visible to 
others. The moral is that the man should exert 
for what he wants to attain. 

It is often argued that if 'Sama' is 'Haq' (True : 
Unquestionable) and for Allah, then why not 
hear the Holy Qur'an instead which is the Book 
of Allah? The answer is self explanatory. People 
get overwhelmed when they listen to the 
'Aayat-e-Qur'ani* (The verses of the Holy 



661 



Book). Their 'Wajd' is known the world over. 
People are known to have breathed thin last in 
their 'Wajd' on listening to a single verse of the 
Holy 'Qur'an'. More details are available on this 
subject in the other volume of this wosk named 
'Ahyaul Uloom'. 

There are five reasons for which the 'Soofia' 
listen to 'Sama'. 

(i) The Holy Book is a gold mine of 
discource on many subjects for the 
'Hadayat' (Guidance) of man. It deals 
with the stories of the 'Kafirs', as much as 
with numerous affairs of the world. It is a 
panacea for all ills and irregularities of 
man. It speaks of the issues of 
inheritance that whereas the mother is 
entitled to one sixth of it, the sister is 
eligible to one third of it. It also stipulates 
that if the husband of a woman dies she 
has to pass through the 'Iddat'* (Staying) 
period of four months and ten days etc. 
Naturally, these things cannot be 
conducive to the ardency of an adorer. 
He wants to hear of love and his 
Beloved. His longing knows no barriers. 

(ii) The second reason is that whereas it 
should happen that the more one listens 
to the Holy Qur'an, the more 
overwhelmed one should become, but 
unfortunately due to its constant 
repitition the man's devotion to it starts 
ebbing. It is a glowing chapter of Islamic 



662 



history that many a heretic became 
Muslim on hearing the 'Qur'ane Karim' 
on its very first recitation. They wept 
their hearts out and embraced Islam. 

"We were also like you. But now our 
hearts have become hardened." 

No wonder Hazrat Umar Farooq (peace 
of Allah be upon him) used to drive people, 
to go back to their villages lest the 'Azmat', 
the glory of the 'Khaane Kaaba' should 
diminish in their hearts. 

(iii) As aforementioned, the third reason is I 
that the melody in 'Sama', its rendering * 
in the 'Wajdan' (State of enchantment), 
the' sonorous voice, join together to 
create an impact on its listener, whereas 
the Holy Qur'an is to be recited in a 
cautions manner. 

We have already related the episode that 
one day the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) went to 
Hazrat Abu Bint Ma'ooz (peace of Allah 
be upon him) and saw her 'Bandis' 
(Female Servants) reciting verses to the 
accompaniment of 'Duff, but when they 
saw Him (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) they started reciting verses in 
His (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him), praise on the 'Duff. He said, 



663 

"Don't do this. Say what you were doing 
before." Obviously because paying 
tributes to the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) is a 
highly venerated act. 

(iv) The fourth reason is that the above 
mentioned traditionally inspiring musical 
instruments are and should be used in 
'Sama' to accentuate its effect, which 
(God forbid) can not be done while 
reciting from the Holy Qur'an. 

(v) The fifth reason is that the listener can 
stop what he does not wish to hear in 
'Sama', according to his condition at that 
time. God forbid - this can not be done 
in the case of the Holy Qur'an. What is 
more, while listening to 'Sama' a 'Soofi' 
is transported into a different world 
•altogether. In this state, he is apt to 

attribute different meanings to what is 
being ostensibly said in 'Sama' at that 
time. Again, this can not be done in the 
case of Holy Qur'an. It would be 'Kufr'. 

III. The third stage in 'Sama' is that of selfless 
vibrance, the 'Wajd' and 'Ra'qs' (Dancing to a 
tune). The man can even go mad and start 
tearing away his clothes. However it is 'Haram' 
for an impostor to do so. 

What is more, it can be said that inkeeping with 
his position it is better that 'a 'Soofi* should listen to 
'Sama' and regain sober. He should have the power 



664 



to encompass himself and remain steady, but the fact 
Is that very few people can attain this stature. When 
ove be blind, manifest and overpowering the man is 
likely tej be rendered helpless. The 'Qual* ie the 
saying 0f Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq (peace of allah be 
upon hirn) to this effect is there. 

"0h Allah, Strengthen our hearts." 

n uSi*^ ^ U$ed *° COme t0 Hazrat Jun ^id 
Baghdad^ (Rahmatullah Alaih). as soon as he used to 

hear anything touching, in the company of his friend 

he used [to cry out in agony of spirit and used to go 

Si? TV' Ha2rat Junald Ba 9 hdadl (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) told him, "If you keep on doing this, it is better 

mat you don't come here any more." Thereafter he 

* arted r ^ nJn 9 his feelings, till one day when he could 

not control himself any longer, yelled aloud on hearing 

a telling Verse and fell down dead on the spot. 

_ It is established from the revellery of the 
Habshi family, as stated earlier, that 'Raqs' under such 
extenuating circumstances is not 'Ghair Mubah' (Not 
valid : Uhdeslrable). It is further substantiated by the 
-M- that f hen the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) declared Hazrat Zaid Bin Ha'ris 
(peac* of Allah be upon him) to be His brother he 
was jn su4h a state of ecstasy over the singular honour 
thu^conftrred on him that he started dancing in joy. 
He was a Very sedate person. 



Going further into the matter, even if *Raqs' in 



665 



such -circumstances is considered 'Khail Kood' i.e> 
some sort of sport, even then it is 'Haram*. But to 
impersonate the veritable and pretend to go crazy and 
tear one's clothes in feigned frenzy is deplorable and 
wastage of money on torn clothes, to boot. 

There are many more illustrious examples to 
this effect. Similarly, when one day the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) told Hazrat 
All (peace of Allah be upon him), "that you are from 
Me and 1 am from you." He danced with joy, although 
his sobriety of demeanour was a byword. 

Similarly, when the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) told Hazrat Hussain 
Alai Uas Salam that "you are like me" he started 
dancing with delight. 

Sometimes, the 'Asfia' tear their clothes into 
tatters and distribute them to people. To object to it is 
a fallacy. Those who know what they are worth, stitch 
them up as a worthy patch in their apparel, in their 
('Gudri ) sleeping rugs or in their prayer mats. Such a 
gift, coming from such an eminent source is a boon for 
them and a 'Mubah' and 'Mubarak' souvenir. 

'AADABE SAMA' : THE DECORUM OF 'SAMA' 

Hazrat Junaid (Rahmatullah Alaih) has said that 
'Zaman', 'Makan' and 'Ikhwan' i.e. the time, the place 
and the audience are of the essence in 'Sama'. 'Sama' 
is not desirable at some hours i.e. 

(i) At the time of 'Namaz'. 

(H) At the time of taking a normal meal. 



666 

(iii) When the heart is disturbed. 

'Sama' should not be conducted at undesirable places 
such as. 

(i) At a thoroughfare. 

(ii) At a dark, dirty, dismal place. 

(iii) At the premises of a cruel person, a tyrant. 

The people of following category are likewise not 
desirable for 4 5ama\ 

(i) The worldly men of affairs. 

(ii) The proud and the contemptuous. 

(iii) The N<j>n-believers in 'Sama'. 

(iv) The false believers in Sama : The pretenders. 

(v) The negligent, the disrespectful people. 

(vi) The gossipers. 

(vii) The mixed company of men and women. 

When 'Ahle Sama' (The participants in Same) 
sit together, they should behave themselves with 
dignity. 

(i) They should sit composedly with heads bowed 
down. 

(ii) They should not look at each other in a casual 
way. Nor should they shake their heads. 

(iii) They should not chatter. Nor should they 
behave formally as if they have come to a 
party, attending to each other. 

(iv) They should sit in the condition of Tashhad' 
i.e. on their knees (as they do in 'Namaz'). 



667 



Then they should conjoin their hearts to Allah 
and wait for His blessings. 
If someone stands up in excitement of 
'Sama'others should not follow him suit. Nor, 
should they stand to formality with each other. 
For instance, if the turban of someone falls 
down from his head during 'Sama', others 
should not remove their turbans also from their 
heads. These customs do not add anything to 
the sombre occassion. On the contrary they 
detract so much from its solemnity. Each thing 
should be weighed on its merit. All old things 
are not bad. Nor are all new concepts 
derogatory. According to Hazrat Imam Shafai 
(Rahmatullah Alaih), it was Hazrat Umar 
Farooq (peace of Allah be upon him) who 
introduced 'Namaze Traveeh' in congregation 
('Ba Jama'at'). Of course, all those un-duty 
fond of things which are contrary to the 'Sunna' 
and 'Hadith' should be discouraged and 
discarded. Each nation, every faith, has its own 
ethos of the people, which should never be 
blamed. To misguide the right into dubious 
channels is tantamount to creating disharmony 
and discontent in a balanced community. The 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has accordingly advised. 

"Live good naturedly according to the 
good traits of people." 

Obviously, if the hearts of people can be won 



668 



by good behaviour, it is 'Kare Sawab' i.e. virtuous and 
rewarding to be good to them. So much so, that the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) used to generally ask people not to stand up on 
seeing Him but people used to do sq out of 
spontaneous respect. 

'AMRE BIL MA'ROOF ^AND «NAHI ANIL 
MUNKAR' : TO ASSERT THE RIGHT AND 
OPPOSE THE WRONG 

'Amre Bil Ma'roof means to support and assert 
the right. 'Nahi Anil Munkar' means to oppose and 
take back the wrong. It is the order of Allah to do so. 
It is one of the most outstanding and basic elements of 
Islam. It is the foundation of 'Deen\ 

Allah is all knowing and Omnipotent. That is 
specifically why He has sent so many of His prophets 
into this world, so that if this proclamation of Allah is 
not enforced on earth, the 'maklooq' (The people) will 
go astray and the very infrastructure of society will 
crumble dpwn. The code of conduct of 'Deen', the 
Faith will fall apart and become 'Batil' i.e. invalid. 

Hence, anyone who fails to abide by it without 
valid reason will be a wanton sinner. The Almighty 
Allah has accordingly ordained. 

Let there be among you a community that 
calls to good, bids to the desirable and 



669 



forbids the disgusting.... (3 : 104) 

It is, as such, a 'Farze Kifaya' to do so. If most of the 
people obey this order of Allah, it will be all right to an 
extent. If noone does it, then all of them will be 
responsible for it. Allah has also proclaimed. 

Who, if we establish them in the land, will 
establish the Prayer and pay the Alms, 
and bid the desirable and forbid the 
disgusting.... (22 : 41) 

In this 'Ayat', (Holy verse from the Glorious. 
'Qur'an) Allah has praised the 'deendar' (The Faithful) 
and restressed this proclamation with the instruction of 
'Iqamatus Salat' (The consolidation of 'Namaz') and 
'Eeta'uz Zakat' (Giving of 'Zakat'). To rub the point in, 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has also stated that "keep on asserting the 
right and striving to enforce the good, otherwise the 
Allah will install that person on you (as a ruler) who 
will be the worst amongst you. So crucial would be this 
era that the prayers of the best among you would also 
be of no use in the tyranical regime." 

According to Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq (peace of 
Allah be upon him), the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said that "a people 
in which the evil prevails to such an extent that they 
get used to it and accept commission of sins in normal 
course of life, soon meet (Azabe Elahi) their nemesis 



670 



by the wrath of Allah." He (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) has further said that "your good 
deeds vis a vis 'Jehad' are like a drop of water in a 
vast sea, whereas in comparison to 'Amre Bil Ma'roofo 
Nahi Anil Munkar' the 'Jehad' is like a drop of water in 
an ocean. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has further stated. 

A. "Those who follow 'Amre bil Maroofo Nahi Anil 
Munkar' and keep on doing the 'Zikr' of Allah 
(Remembering Allah) gain a lot, by the Mercy 
of Allah the Beneficient. Such pious person are 
protected by Allah. They are a source of 
protection for others too by obeying the 
commands of Allah to this effect. But things get 
awry when the good stop pursuing 'Amre bil 
Ma'roofoNahi Amil Munkar'." 

B. "That, people should avoid being at those 
places where tyrants are at large, resorting to 
mayhem and battery of the innocent." 

C. "If a person sees a sin being committed and 
resorts to (Nahi Anilmunkar) its condemnation, 
he is like a man who was not present to see the 
misdeed of that nature being performed. But, if 
he is agreeable to it, he himself becomes a party 
to it." 

D. "That, each prophet has his 'Hawaris* i.e. 
principal supporters and assistants. They act 
according to Allah's will and His Book. They 
themselves do good deeds and assit the prophet 
in asserting the good and averting the evil. But 



671 



there will come a time when the so called elite 
of the 'Deen' will stand on 'Mimbers', (Parapets 
for addressing the people) deliver vociferous 
sermons to others and act against them, 
themselves. My Ummah should be wary of 
these impostors. They should perform 'Jehad' 
(Battle for Allah against His foes) against them 
to save the 'Deen' (Faith). If they can't do so 
with their hands, they should do so with their 
tongue. But if that too may not be possible, the 
man should at least condemn the thing in his 
heart. The last stage is the least of all." 

E. "That, Ailah ordained an angel to topple a 
certain village upside down for its unforgivable 
sins. He humbly pointed out that 'in the village 
also lives a pious person who has all along 
remained away from sins'? The Almighty Allah 
reaffirmed His command and said, "Topple that 
village regardless, as, despite his piety he 
remained unconcerned with them and never felt 
sad over the state of affairs prevailing." 

Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa (peace of Allah be upon 
her) has narrated that the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) told her that "once 
Allah sent His 'Azab' (wrathful bane) on a city which 
contained eighteen thousand prophet like persons, 
because they remained unconcerned with the evil 
doers, who had wreaked havoc by their tyranny and 
misdeeds. They nevej opposed them. Nor did they 
feel hurt over their devilry." 

People asked the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him), "Has anyone a 



672 



greater status than the 'Shuhada'?" He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) replied, "That person 
has greater status than a 'Sahaheed' (one who gives 
his life for Allah) who may put a tyrant king to 
accountability for his sins and atrocities and the king 
has him slained for taking him to task. If this does not 
happen, in that case the pen will have no power over 
him, ever." 

It is in the 'Hadith' that hte Almighty Allah had 
informed Hazrat Yooshah Bin Noon (peace of Allah be 
upon him) by 'Wahi' "that I will kill a hundred 
thousand persons of your people. Sixty thousand of 
them will be evil, while forty thousand of them will be 
righteous." He humbly asked Allah for its cause. Allah 
replied, "Because these good people did not take 
notice of the miscreant's bad deeds and failed to 
reprimand th^rn. They used to feel no hesitation in 
mixing up freely with them, as if they were not 
culprits." 

THE CONDITIONS OF 'IHTISAB' 
ACCOUNTABILITY 

Islam is based on wellfounded principles. Those 
who violate them are accountable for them. There are 
four major elements of Ihtisab i.e. accountability viz. 

1. The 'Muhtasib* (The Judge) i.e. the one who 
monitors it. 

2. The person who is put to accountability i.e. 
'Ihtisab' for his deeds. 

3. The accountable deeds. 

4. The conditions of accountability viz 'Ihtisab'. 



673 



The Muhtasib has to be an upright 'Deendar' 
person. The judiciary and the king should approve his 
appointment and authority. There is however a point 
of difference between the 'Ulema' whether it is 
necessary that the king should ratify his position. In our 
opinion, as the king is likely to be a man of 
questionable standing himself, it is not essential. As for 
his own 'Adaalat' i.e. being just, thfe matter may 
become controvertial, as no human being is immune to 
error. 

Some people asked Hazrat Hassan Basri 
(Rahmatullah Alaih), "How far is it true? There is a 
man who says that a person can not do the 'Ihtisab' of 
a person i.e. judge him unless he purifies himself." 
Hazrat Hassan Basri (Rahmatullah Alaih) replied, "It 
appears that the Satan has taught him this thing so that 
the door of 'Ihtisab' may be shut, for good." 

To be fair, the Ihtisab is of two kinds: 

One way is that of counselling the other on his 
shortcomings. Naturally, if a peson commits an error 
himself and sermonises others, he will become a 
laughing stock of others. By acting thus he may 
perhaps cause more harm than do good. Such 'Ihtisab' 
will become a 'Gunah' i.e. a sin in itself. That is why 
the pretentious 'Ulema' are criticised by the people the 
most. Their spurious ('Va'az') sermon is despicated. 
They become 'Gunahgar' and do immense damage to 
'Deen'. An 'Alim' who himself indulges in 'Fisqo 
Fujoor' i.e. in evil things, is actually poles apart to what 
he should be. Instead of being a reformer in 'Deen', he 
is actually the devil's disciple, the reverse of it. He is 



674 

looked down upon by the people. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that "In 'Shabe Me'raf I saw a 
group of people whose tongues were being chopped 
up with scissors sizzling with fire. 1 was informed that 
they were the people whoused to practice contrary to 
what they used to preach." 

Likewise Allah the All knowing once sent 'Vahi' 
(Divine Instruction) to Hazrat Isa ^ Alai Uas Salam 
Prophet Jesus Christ) "Oh son of Mariam! Owe. adv ce 
to yourself first. If you follow it, then you can give 
advice to others. Otherwise, feel ashamed of yourself 
for duplicity of character, before Me." 

The second method of 'Ihtisab' is that he should 
use his hands and moral power to suppress the evil If 
he sees a cask of liqour, he should dispel it forth with 
pour it out and throw it away. If he hears the sound of 
'Chango Rubab', he should not waste a moment. He 
should destroy them. If a mischief monger is out to 
creat mischief of any kind, he should put a stop t« it 
firmly with an iron hand. He can do so only if he is 
above and beyond such evils, himself. 

Summum bonum there are four stages of 
'Ihtisab'. ' 

(i) The first stage is of counselling and creating the 
fear of Allah in the man's heart so that he may 
*iot do it again. It is vital for all Muslims. No 
'Farman' of the king is required for it. On the 
contrary, the real verity lies in telling the king to 



675 



abstain from the evil and the atrocities he is 
generally used to. 

(ii) The second stage is that of scolding, rebuking 
and taking the culprit to last vehemently, like 
telling him in so many words that "you are a 
scoundrel, a 'Fasiq' (Miscreant : Evil doer one 
who acts against established code of morality) 
etc. you have done this, this. Aren't you 
ashamed of yourself etc. "No 'Farman* (order) is 
required for it, also. 

(Hi) The third stage consists of the aforementioned 
method of dealing firmly with the defaulter by 
breaking the wine cask of the drunkard and 
breaking the 'Chango Rubab' of a villianous 
reveller etc. These things are 'Wajib' (Plausible : 
Commendable) and equivalent to 'Ibadat* i.e. 
worship of Allah. The moral code of Islam is 
very strong. Islam has permitted it irrespective 
of the intervention of the king. 

(iv) The fourth mehtod of 'Ihtisab' constitutes of 
having to use physical force to chastise a 
person. However, there is fear of strong 
reaction by the defaulter, in it. For this, a 
counter strength will be required to be rallied. 
This is the least effective method. It may require 
the king's intervention. 

Besides, the conditions of 'Ihtisab' keep on 
changing. 

V For instance, a son can not use strong language 
with his father or be in any way harsh to him. 



676 



B Nor Is it proper for a son who may be a 'Jallad' 
(An excutioner) to execute his father on a 
verdict of felony, if he is a 'Kafir'. 

C However, for a son to throw away the 'Sharab' 
i e the liqour of his father, to take away the 
usurped goods from his father and return it to 
its rightful owner etc. is in order, despite the fact 
that his father may not like it. Nevertheless, the 
son should respectful to his father all the time. 
Hazrit Hassan Basri (Rahmatullah Alaih) has 
remarked that "A son should remain quiet when 
his father is angry. He should not give advice to 
hlm.' ; 

D The 'Ihtisab' by a 'Ghulam' (Slave) of his 
master, a wife's 'Ihtisab' of her husband and the 
subject's 'Ihtisab' of their ruler Is like the 'Ihtisab 
of hi$ father by his son. 

E But the Ihtisab' of a student by his teacher Is 
easy. The child can gain so much from it. 

Now, we come to the 'Ihtisab' of the 'Amal' i.e. 
the act or acts in question. It has four phases. 

(i) The first one pertains to small mistakes and 
indiscretions which are bad, like a child breaking 
som^thig belonging to another person or an 
unbalanced person taking liqour. Wearing a 
gold ring, using a silken handkerchief, drinking 
water in a cup made of silver, fall into this 
category. Counselling in indicated in such cases. 

(il) In the second category the element of sin Is 
manifest. For instance. 



677 



A. To enforce the law is the function of the 
. Hakim (The judge) but if a person has 

already taken wine, he can only be given 
advice. 

B. On the contrary if it gets known that a 
person intends to take liqour at night, he 
should be adequately counselled to stop 
him from indulging in this vice. It will be 
heartening if he relents. Likewise, coming 
to graver things the 'Ihtisab' of a *Na 
Mahram' sitting in the privacy of a 
woman and that of a man standing in 
front of a 'Hammam' so that he may see 
'Na Mahram' ladies coming out of that 
place is necessary. These are culpable 
sins. 

The 'Ihtisab' of the third kind can be rather 
misguided as it is based on conjecture or 
suspicion. Peeping into closed doors,- eaves 
dropping is not regular. Likewise even if a 
'Fasiq' (A licentious person) be stealthily carrying 
something it is not proper to put him to the 
indignity of a search. He may be known to be a 
drunkard but to slander him on mere suspicion 
is not good. However, if he be smelling of 
liqour, it would be in order to take away the 
wine bottle and break it. 

One day Hazrat Umar Farooq (Allah be pleased 
with him) consulted his friends of Faith and 
asked if a 'Hakim' (A ruler* : An administrator) 
can issue a 'Hed' (A decree : Judgement for act 
in default) if he sees a person doing something 



678 



unlawful with his own eyes. Some people said 
that it was in order but when the matter came 
to the knowledge, of Hazrat AH (Allah be 
pleased with him) he said that "Allah's order are 
clear on the subject, that there should be at 
least two witnesses before a 'Hed' is 
pronounced. Hence in such a case it is better 
for the ruler to keep quiet." 

(iv) The fourth condition is that the default, the 
disorder should be manifest without any doubt. 
As such, if a 'Hanaff (Follower of Imam Abu 
Hanifa (Rahmatullah Alaih) performs a 'Nikah' 
without a 'Vali' the 'Shafai' (The follower of 
Imam Shafai Rahmatullah Alaih) should not 
object to it. But, if a Shafai does so, he should 
be checked from doing it, as it is not in order 
for a follower to go against his 'Imam'. 
However, there are some dissidents who say 
that there is no harm in the follower of one 
'Imam' to go against him and follow an other 
Imam. Obviously, such rolling stones gather no 
moss. However, it is a heinous crime if a 
'Badati' (A miscreant) says that Allah has a 
'JisnV (God forbid), a body or God forbid calls 
the Holy Qur'an a common book or talks 
intolerable rot like this. He should be put to 
'Ihtteab' sternly and taken to task severely. 

The third element constitutes of the liability of 
the defaulter. It can be of several kinds. 

A As stated earlier, a son can not chastise his 
father but a 'Muhtasib' (A monitoror : A 



679 



counseller) can have an unbalanced person 
stopped from doing damaging things. Likewise 
a child can be checked from causing harm to 
goods and the property of other persons. 

B. Likewise, if an animal of an outsider is found 
grazing in the farm of a faithful, he can be 
warded off. 

C. Similarly, a person who damages the property 
of an other person is liable to 'Ihtisab'. 

In such cases all the trouble taken to protect the 
property of a faithful is 'Sawab', no matter how much 
time and labour may be involved in it. The fact 
remains that to see damage being done in whatever 
shape it may be and remain quiet is to act against the 
standing orders of Allah. 

(i) That is why, that person who stands up frimly 
in 'Ihtisab' of a cruel king and gets killed for it is 
considered superior to a 'Shaheed' which is a 
very high status. 

(ii) Secondly, if the man knows that he can stop an 
evil without any fear and yet does not do so, 
makes himself Gunahgar due to his negligence 
or complainer. 

(iii) If a man finds that the evil is prevailing but does 
not have the strength to stop it. He should at 
least protest against it. 

(iv) Lastly, if one feels that he is against a vicious 
circle. The immorality and Satanic deeds are the 
order of the *day. He has to face merciless 



680 



tyrants in absolute power. Them he had better 
condemn the evil in his heart and keep quiet 
fully convinced that his life is in peril and his 
silence per force majeure is the only alternative 
left to him. He can't do anything. However, if 
someone says that Allah has ordained. 

< \ M : S^Jl) <u £ i^»J) ^ d J 

And do not cast yourself to destruction by 
your on hands.... (2 : 195) 

The answer is that Hazrat Ibne Abbas (Allah be 
pleased with him) has said that the' meaning of this 
'Ayaf (The Qur'anic verse) is that "Spend your *Mal' 
(Money and goods) for Allah so that you are not 
destroyed." 

According to Hazrat Bar'aa Bin Alaazib (Allah 
be pleased With him) the meaning of this verse of the 
Holy Book is that a person should commit a sin and 
thereafter thjink and say that Allah will not forgive him. 

However, as per Hazrat Bar'aa Bin Alaazib 
(Allah be pleased with him) the meaning of this verse 
is that it is tantamount to 'Halakat' i.e. killing" one's self, 
if a person sins and thereafter does not relent from 
doing so. 

It is argued, that it behoves a to Muslim not to 
hesitate to attack a 'saff' (A line of soldiors) of the 
enemy single handedly, fighting valiantly, killing as 
many of his adversaries as he can and give his life in 
this process. The enemies of Islam would thus be 
overawed by his gallantry and become overwhelmed 



681 



by their staunch Faith and valour. Such a soldier is a 
'Shahid'. In antithesis if a blind soldier or an invalid 
person does so, on his 'Ihtisab', it would be declared 
by one and all that he has wasted away his life, to no 
avail. 

The 'Ihtisab' of a 'Mohtasib' can be affected by 
his meekness of temperament. Such a person is likely 
to be cowardly in pronouncing the mangnitude of the 
evil. Similarly, a 'Mohtasib' may be influenced by the 
('Shaan-o-Shaukat') i.e. the grandeur - pomp and 
show of the defaulter. For instance, in another case a 
student may not be able to perform 'Ihtisab' of his 
teacher for fear that he may not teach him after that. 
Similarly, a 'Mohtasib' may not be able to do the 
'Ihtisab' of a ruler least he shoud stop his monthly 
allowance. 

The subject has been broached before, that a 
'Mohtasib' may not be able to do the 'Mohasaba or 
Ihtisab' of that person who may be giving him 'Nan-o- 
Nufqa' (Livelihood) for which he is 'Muhtaj' 
(Dependent) on him. He may even be at the peril of 
his life at the hands of a tyrant. Hence he would be 
helpless! 

THE STATUS OF IHTISAB : ACCOUNTABILITY 

Ihtisab consists of eight things. 

(1) To know the facts. 

(2) To frame -the changes : To intimate the 
defaulter of his faults. 

(3) To counsel and give hiim advice. 

(4) To deal with him firmly in strong words. 



682 



(5) To set him right by hand. 

(6) To threaten to wound or injur him. 

(7) To beat him. 

(8) To take up arms against the defaulter and to 
call one's allies in faith for this purpose, if 
necessary. 

(1) In trying to ascertain the facts of the matter, the 
'Mohtasib' should be careful not to cross the 
barriers of decency. As aforementioned, 
peeping into the house of a person, scaling of 
his wall, listening to secret talk enquiring from 
the neighbours in a manner which may have 
connotations of slander in, it is not correct. Two 
witnesses to the offence are necessary. If entry 
into a house may become inevitable, it should 
not be without the permission of the 
householders. Moreover two witnesses should 
be present. It is the famous saying of Hakim 
Luqman, the great sage that "it is better to 
conceal a doubtful thing rather than casting 
aspersions on a person." This axiom was 
inscribed in his finger ring. 

(2) Secondly, if one sees an illiterate person not 
performing his 'Rukoo-o-Sujood' properly in the 
mosque or if his feet are not clean etc. it is 
necessary to brief him about it. The idea should 
be to educate, not to hurt him. It is better to do 
so by saying such polite words as 'is there no 
'Alim' near your house who should teach you 
these things." 

(3) It is always better to do the counselling of the 
person amiably. Sometimes harshness has 



683 



reverse effect, specially on a beginner. 
Backbiting is a treacherous evil. It is 'Haram'. It 
is better to reform such a person by saying 
"who is immune to a fault. To err is human. 
May Allah rectify things." Then the counseller 
should go on quoting the relevant 'Ayat' of the 
'Holy Qur'an' in which back-biting has been 
condemned etc.' The principle of not hurting 
the 'Izzate Nafs' (Self respect) of a person, 
particularly at his back, and at the same time to 
discreetly rectify the evil should go together. 
The 'Shaitan' (The Satan) makes an easy victim 
to us all to resort to backbiting of a fellow 
Muslim, by pumping our ego. 

Once Hazrat Da'ood Tai (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
humbly asked the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) about the status 
of a man who goes to a king for his ihtisab'. He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
replied, "I am afraid he may be whipped." 
Hazrat Da'ood Tai (Rahmatullah Alaih) asked, 
"Ya Rasoolullah, suppose he can bear them?" 
The Holy Prophet of Allah (peace and blessings 
' of Allah be upon him) said, "He may be killed." 
Hazrat Da'ood Tai (Rahmatullah Alaih) again 
respectfully submitted." Ya Rasollullah suppose 
he is not afraid of death even?" The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) answered, "In that case I am afraid of that 
for him, which is hidden and worse of all evils. 
He may become prey to the Satan in egotistic 
thought of self aggrandizement!" 

Similarly, Abu Sulaiman Durrani (Rahmatullah 



684 



Alaih) described his autobiography in these 
words. "One day I thought of the Ihtisab of a 
certain 'Khalifa' (Ruler in Muslim regime). I 
knew he would kill me. I probed my heart. It 
was not afraid of death. Then 1 thought of the 
perpetual throng of 'Khalifa's' flatterers and gave 
up the thought immediately. I knew that I will 
become a hero in the eyes of others but was 
afraid that I may lose the ('Daulate Nafs') 
unique treasure of humility and doing things for 
'Deen' and Allah only. Even a momentary 
thought of self esteem would have destroyed 
me completely." 

The fourth stage comes when one has to use 
strong words, to deal with a miscreant. This 
stage should reach when polite counselling may 
not work. Then even, abusive language should 
not be used. The nascent truth should be said. 
For instance he should be called a 'Zalim' 
(Tran^ressor) or 'Fasiq' (Evil doer : Lustful) or 
'Jahil' (Ignorant) or 'Ahnoq' (A stupid person). 
A sinner is an 'Ahmaq'. The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) has 
said that "an 'Aqalmand' (Sensible person) is 
he, wjio does his 'Ihtisab' himself and keeps his 
'Maut' (Death) in mind. Vice versa, that person 
is ah 'Ahmaq' who is licentuous and libidinal, 
following his 'Khawahishe Nafs*. His hands and 
tongue are hurtful. He is arrogant and still 
vainly thinks that Allah will forgive his sins." 

The fifth stage is of reformation. It starts with 
verbally persuading the defaulter to say remove 
+he pompous silken clothes from his person or 



685 



to throw away his liqour. But, if he is the least 
hesitant the man should be physically shaken to 
come to his senses. The action should become 
firmer and firmer gradually according to the 
situation trying all the while not to humiliate and 
redicule him. But if the later is still obdurate 
then the 'Chango Rubab' of a wasteful 
merrymaker can be destroyed, the liqour of the 
drunkard thrown away by the Mohtasib' and the 
other faithful with him, beating him severely 
while doing so. 

(6) The sixth stage is of threatening the adament 
illdoer. If all else fails, the man should be told, 
"if you do not desist and throw away the liqour 
(and repent for it) I will act very sternly with 
you, or I will beat your head etc." But to 
threaten aggravatingly and unfairly 'that I will 
tear away your silken clothes or I will hurt your 
family etc' is not justified. In any case the 
clothes should not \>e torn nor the utensil 
containing the liqour broken, unless it be an 
original clay cask of wine, which is better 
shattered. 

(7) If the criminal be a persistent defaulter and 
uppish in his ways and it may be felt that 
perhaps giving him a beating will teach him a 
befitting lesson, he may be slogged physically or 
beaten with a stick. Such strong arm methods 
should be used as a last resort. The beating 
should also not be merciless. His face and other 
delicate parts should not be hurt. If beating with 
hand suffices, the stick should not be used. As 
soon as the man says that 'he is sorry, he won't 



686 



do it again' he should be spared. The Ta'azir 
and Had' (Punishment : Decree : Verdict) lies 
with the Hukoomat' (The government). In case 
of a stubborn person even the sword can be 
unsheathed to scare him. 

(8) The last stage but not the least is that in case of 
an obstinate, unyielding intransigent person the 
end is reached. In such an eventuality, the 
'Mohtasib' has no other alternative left but to 
rally support of the faithful and take up arms 
against a diehard 'Fasiq' and his ill fated allies. 
However, some 'Ulema' advocate the 
intervention of the king in it but others are of 
the opinion that just as the permission of the 
king is necessary to fight the 'Kafirs', the king's 
permission is likewise not required in fighting 
such filthy 'Fasiqs'. 

THE 'MUHTASIB* 

It is obvious frofri the foregoing that the 
'Muhtasib' should have three qualities viz 'Ilm' 
(Learning : Knowledge : Education), 'Zuhd' (Piety of 
character) and 'Husne Aklaq' (Good behaviour : Good 
conduct). Without 'Ilm' he will not be able to 
differentiate between the good and the bad. Without 
'Zuhd' he will be sailing in the same boat as the culprit. 
Without 'Husne Akhlaq' the 'Mohtasib' will not be able 
to conduct himself with fairness and dignity. His anger 
will overrule him. He will not remain God fearing. 
People will abhor him for his prejudicial behaviour. It is 
not unlikely that he may be hurt by people for his high 
handedness His 'Nafsaniat' (Egotism and 
selfcentredness) will render him a 'Gunahgar' i.e. a 



687 



sinner, hence unfit to be in such a worthy position of 
trust. 

Once Hazrat Ali (Allah be pleased with him) 
defeated a 'Kafir' in combat. He had just sat on his 
chest and was about to slay him when he spat on his 
face. He spared his life instantaneously and said 
rubbing his hand cooly. "You can go. Now, if I kill 
you, my wrath would be part of my action. It will not 
be for Allah." 

Similarly, Hazrat Umar Farooq (Allah be 
pleased with him) stopped flogging a person when he 
abused him. He informed the questioners that 'I was 
doing so for Allah. Now I am angry. It is not 'Jaiz' 
(Fair : Allowed : Permissible) . 

Once, the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) described the pre-requisites of a 
'Mohtasib' and said that "a 'Mohtasib' should be a 
faithful, 'Alim', 'Burdabar' (Sedate person) and a good 
tempered person." 

It is the saying of Hazrat Hassan Basri 
(Rahmatuilah Alaih) that "as a good principle but not a 
rule, a 'Mohtasib' should practise what he preaches." 

It is so, because when people asked the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
about it, whether, unless we ourselves act on a thing 
can't we adopt 'Amre Bil Ma'roofo Nahi Anil Munkar', 
He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon himj 
classified that "It is not so. You must try your best to 
do so but if you may not be able to succeed fully, you 
must however not give up 'Ihtisab'. At the same time 



688 



the 'Mohtasib' should be a patient person, capable of 
facing trying situations with fortitude and grit." The 
Almighty Allah has ordained. 

Bid the desirable, forbid the disgusting, 
and endure patiently what befalls thee; 

(31 : 17) 

Hence a 'Mohtasib' should be able to face the 
difficulties that come in his way. 

A. A 'Mphtasib' should maintiain his position. He 
should keep himself at a reasonable distance 
from all that may be inimical or incriminating. 
His aloofishness will stand him in good stead. 

B. There should be no greed in a 'Mohtasib'. A 
'Buzurg' used to take the flesh bones from a 
'Qassab' (A butcher) for his cat. When he saw 
the 'Qassab' doing something wrong, he felt 
sorry for his greed, came home destroyed the 
stuff, then took the 'Qassab' to task. The 
'Qassab' taunted him about the flesh bones that 
he used to take from him. He replied, "I have 
already taken care of the evil." 

C. Similarly, a 'Mohtasib' can not dispense justice if 
he wants to remain popular with the people. He 
can be kind but not complaisant. He had to be 
just abd fair. 

D. One day Ka'abal Ahbar (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
asked Hazrat Abu . Muslim Khaulani 



689 



(Rahmatullah Alaih), "How are the matters with 
you in your people?" He replied, "Every thing is 
all right." Hazrat Ahbar (Rahmatullah Alaih) was 
surprised and remarked "but I have read in the 
Torait' (Torah) that the condition of a 
'Mohtasib' is never good in his peole." Hazrat 
Khaulani (Rahmatullah Alaih) replied, "The 
Torait' is right. Abu Muslim has not conveyed 
the truth. Indeed, the spirit of 'Ihtisab' lies in the 
'Mohtasib' feeling a pain for the person. The 
reformation of the accused should be his 
principal concern. He should counsel the 
defaulter like an errant son." 

Once a 'Mohtasib' spoke rather harshly to 
Khalifa Mamoon (Rahmatullah Alaih). The Khalifa told 
him cooly. "The Almighty Allah has ordained a better 
person than you to a speak more kindly to a worse 
person than me." 

It is in 'Soorae Taha* (A chapter in the Holy 
Book). When the Almighty Allah sent Prophets. Moosa 
and Haroon (peace of allah be upon them) to 'Firaun' 
(The legendary heathen Pharoah of Egypt) he 
ordained. 

("■h # d 'jl SJ iTJ& 

And speak to him in gentle words.... 

(20 : 44) 

It is incumbent upon the faithful to follow in the 
footsteps of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him). One day a young man came to 
Him (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) and 



690 



asked for His permission to commit adultery. The 
'Sahabae KaranY (Allah be pleased with them) present 
were dumbfounded, lost control on themselves on his 
audacity and wanted to thrust him on the spot. The 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) stopped them, called him and made him sit close 
to him - almost knee to knee. "Would you, God forbid 
that someone should act like this with your mother? 
Would that anyone should behave thus with your 
mother's or fathers sisters?" He said 'No' every time. 
Thereupon the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) remarked that "Others also want 
this?" After that He (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) affectionately tapped His hand over his 
chest and said, "Oh Allah the Merciful! Purify his heart. 
Give him honour to protect his secret organs from 
others in sin and forgive him." It is related that after 
that he became so pious that if anyone ever asked him 
which is worst sin of all, 'adultery' he used to reply and 
shiver. 

It was related to Hazrat Fazeel Ayaz , 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) by people that Hazrat Sufian Bin 
Einia (Rahmatullah) used to take 'Khalaah' (gift of 
honour) from the king. Hazrat Fazeel became unhappy 
and rebuked Hazrat Sufian (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
angrily. Hazrat Sufian answered, "I may not be 
amongst the 'Saleheen' (Plural of saleh i.e. Pious) but I 
love them/' 

One day Hazrat Salah Bin Ateem (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) was sitting with his friends and disciples. He and 
those sitting with him saw a person pass by. The 
border of his robe was dongling in a showy way. It is 



691 

'Makrooh' according to 'Shari'af. His dlsdples wanted 
to rough handle him for It. They were so annoyed. 
Hazrat Salah asked them to keep quiet and said that 
he knows how to deal with him best Hazrat Salah 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) beckoned him and said, "I have to 
ask, you for something?" He enquired, "What"? Hazrat 
Salah said, "PI: Pull the border of your robe, up " He 
did so. Hazrat Fazeel smiled and told his disciples 
Had you been impolite to him, he might have called 
you a bad name, in turn." 

Once, a person caught hold of a woman and 
pulled out a dagger out of his cuff at her, in anger 
She started wailing and crying for help but noone 
dared to go near them. Hazrat Bashar Haft 
(Rnamatullah alaih) quietly went and rammed his 
shoulder against the man. He came a purler and lost 
consciousness. The knife fell down from his listless 
hands. He was sweating profusely. People asked him 
about it when he regained consciousness. He said "I 
know only this much that a man came to me in a huff 
and told me Almighty Allah is seeing what you are 
doing. I got so nervous that I fainted on my feet 
overawed and abashed. People informed him that it 
was Hazrat Bashar Hafi (Rahmatullah Alaih). He cried 
out. "What a piety. How silly I am. My face is now 
mantled with shame. How will I be able to go for his 
Ziarat? How shall I face him? He became sick. High 
fever and delirium overtook him. He died after a 
week. 



THINGSr A,UNG <MUNKARAr ^DESIRABLE 

Almost all over the world the things are getting 



692 

rather lax amongst the Muslims these days. The faithful 
are forgetting the basics. The spirit of Faith which 
made it a glorious code of conduct is ebbing and 
getting fainter and fainter, all over. At times, what is in 
the forefrbnt is being neglected and what is at the 
background is being emphasised. New fangled artifices 
and intricacies are being introduced into faith with 
obvious repercussions. People seen to have lost hope 
of reformation. They have even given up those things 
which they can do easily. Neglect, and taking the 
undesirable things which are so damaging for Deen for 
granted has become the order of the day. Their are 
innumerable 'Munkarat', (Undesirable things : 
Indiscretious) that all of them can not be touched 
upon, here. They are being committed every where; in 
the streets, in the 'Hammams' (Public baths) and at 
home. 

'MUNKARATS' OF THE MOSQUE 

There are so many 'Munkarats'. They are strictly 
forbidden. 

(1) Like, the 'Rukoo-o-Sujood' are being 
perfunctorily performed, 

(2) Odd connotations, like musical notes are being 
added to Cllhan') rendering of the Holy Qur'an, 
in its sacred recitation. 

(3) While saying the 'Azaan' (call for prayers), the 
wbrds are being unnecessarily stretched. While 
uttering 'Hayya Alius Sala' (You are being called 
for prayers) and 'Hayya Allah Falah' (Come for 
your betterment), the entire body is put askew 
from 'Qibla'. 



693 



(4) The 'Khatib' i.e. the person who gives the 
'Khutba' (Address to the faithful in prayers or 
otherwise) wears silken clothes and displays a 
gilt-edged sword in his hand, while doing so. 

(5) People gossip and raise cain in mosques. Some 
of them tell wild stories and recite frivolous 
verses, there. Charms, amulets are freely sold 
there. Small children disturb the 'Namazis' (the 
prayer-sayers) . 

In the initial days, the 'Habshi's (The negroid 
people) used to play 'Gatka' (Slap sticks) in the 
mosque which was stopped after the 
intervention of Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa (Allah be 
pleased with her) . 

In the olden days, some persons used to do 
'Khayyati' (Tailoring) in the nooks of the 'Masjid' 
but it too was stopped. Undermine the sanctity 
of the mosque is not good. So much so that the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) except for at the very inception, 
used to give orders and do the consultative 
work with His Sahaba in adjoining premises i.e. 
even 'Hukumrani' was segregated. 

(6) Likewise, coming to the mosque in gorgeous, 
showy clothes is undesirable. In the 'Munkarats' 
of the olden days was also the custom of the 
women coming to say their prayers there. 
Although they used to be separately seated, it 
was promptly stopped. 

(7) The practice of the olden days to congregate in 
the mosque and settle accounts and affairs there 



694 

was also stopped to uphold the sanctity of the 
mosque. Doing so is 'Makrooh'. 

'MUN KARAT OF THE 'BAZAAR' (MARKET 
PLACE) 

Following are the 'Munkirats' of the bazaar. 

(i) To resort to falsehood with the buyer. To 
conceal the defects of the commodity being 
sold, if any. 

(ii) To cheat by defective weights and measures i.e. 
to weigh less or measure (cloth etc.) short. 

(iii) To be dishonest in dealings with the customer. 
It can be in many ways For instance, to charge 
more by attributing those qualities to the 
merchandise, which it does not possess. 

(iv) _ To sell prohibited things. Like, to sell toys and 

other children's playthings made in the shape of 
forbidden musical instruments or animals, 
specially on the occasion of Eid. To deal in 
'Chango Rubab' and other such hedonistic l Saz' 
(Musical Instruments) . 

(v) To sell or use gold and silver utensils etc. They 
are 'Haram'. 

(vi) To sell things required by Fire-worshippers, on 
the 'Nauroze Day', for them, to make money. 
Our ancestors were so cautious, that some of 
them used to keep a fast on the Fire 
worshipper's festival day, lest any sweets etc. 
coming from them should somehow reach their 
hands from such ignoble sources. They used to 



695 



abstain from candle glowing etc. on the roof 
tops on that day. However, other 'Ulema' used 
to say, 'to keep a fast • on that day would 
tantamount to remembring or in a way 
commemorating that day. Hence it should also 
be considered a simple, normal day, like any 
other day and ignored.' 

'MUNKARATS' OF THE ROAD SIDE 

These 'Munkirats' are as follows: - 

(1) To make pillars on the road or to plant a tree in 
the middle of the road. 

(2) To make outlets of water from the overbearing 
arches which may make .the roadside dirty, 
creating muddles in the way. 

(3) To harness animals on the thorough fares in 
such a way that they may obstruct pedestrians 
and traffic. 

(4) To cast thorns and thistles or bushes having 
them so carelessly, that they may get strewn on 
the roadside. 

(5) To be cruel to animals by overloading them. 

(6) It is not proper for the 'Qassab', the butcher, to 
slay animals on the roadside. 

(7) To throw banana skins and other slippery peels 
on the ground. 

(8) To sprinkle too much water on the streets and 
thoroughfare making them muddy and slippery. 



696 

(9) To allow water drains and outlets to pass 
through streets and roads. 

(10) To allow stray dogs of menacing nature to roam 
aound the streets. Harmless dogs, whether 
awake or asleep do not fall into this category. 

THE 'MUNKARAT* OF 'HAMMAM* (PUBLIC 
BATHING PLACES) 

(i) A woman should take care not to bare her 
person from the nail to the knee. She should 
take bath in a covered place.. No part of her 
body should be visible to a man. 

(11) Pictures of animals and other menagerie painted 
on the walls of a 'Hammam' are 'Haram'. 

(iii) According to the followers fo Hazrat Imam 
Shafai (Rahmatullah Alaih) to dip an unclean 
finger or utensil in limited quantity of clean 
water is not permissible. It is. valid according to 
the school of thought of Imam Malik 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) but no objections should be 
raised against them. The opinion of Imam Abu 
Han.ifa (Rahmatullah Alaih) is also the same. 
>The contention is that such contamination 
should not take place in small quantity of water. 
According to the followers of Imam Abu Hanifa 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) the 'Hauz' i.e the water 
tank should be large, about ten yards by ten 
yards and there should be a lot of water in it. 
sAlso too much water should not be wasted. 



THE 'MUNKARATS' OF 'MEHMANF 
(ENTERTAINING TO A MEAL) 



697 



The 'Munkirats' of 'Mehmani' arc as under:- 

Things like silk dressed, richly draped and 
carpetted floors, silver burner or stove, The 
'Itardan' i.e. a perfume sprinkler and 'Gulab 
Pash' (A scent burner) and walls and draperies 
having pictures of animals are all 'Najalz' (Not 
permissible) . 

A stove made in the shape of an animal is also 
not 'Jaiz' (Valid : Allowed : Desirable). 

Music show," dancing by women or young girls 
is strictly prohibited. They are a source of many 
an evil. Such sensual acts must be nipped in the 
bud. If the guest can't help it, he should leave 
the place but the 'Ihtisab' of such evil doers is 
necessary. * 

Once Hazrat Imam Hanbal (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
saw a silver rouge pot at such a gathering and 
left the place. 

If a person sees some man wearing silken 
clothes or a gold ring, he should leave the 
place, since 'Raisham' is 'Harem' for men like 
liqour. The growing young children should be 
specially guarded against wearing such attire, 
lest they should become habituated to an evil 
dress when they grow up. 

It is 'Makrooh' to sit in an assembly of men 
where mimics, jokers and evil talkers may be 
present. 

The chapter of 'Munkirat' is a long one. The 
spirit of the foregoing may be adopted for 



698 



pursuance in a school, a monastry, an affice or 
before a ruler or a king. This is as best as man 
can think, the rest is best known to Allah, It is 
not the letter of the law (of morals) only but it's 
spirit that really matters the most. 

THE RULER, THE SUBJECTS AND RULE (THE 
GOVERNMENT) 

It is a sacred thing to rule with justice. If the rule 
is just, it is 'Khilafat' (The chosen pi Allah to rule the 
earth) for man on Allah's earth. Vice versa it is 
'Niabayat' (Being assistant : Follower) 'Shaitan' (The 
Satan), for, there is nothing more agonising than the 
atrocity of a ruler. It creates great discontentment and 
mischief in the people. 'Ilmo Amal' (Learning : 
Educational competence and its practice) are its 
foundations. 

As such the ruler should know his duty and true 

status. 

A. He should know why he has been sent into this 
world. 

B. He should know his goal as in it lies his welfare 
and the betterment of his people. He owes it to 
them. 

C. The ruler should realise that like others, this 
world is not his permanent place of residence. 
Actually he is in transit, here. Death is a, 
culminating reality. The womb of the mother is% 
his beginning. The grave is his final resting * 
place. 

D. In fact, a man's journey through life via his 



699 



grave to eternity is like that of a 'Musafir' 
(traveller) traversing a long, arduous path 
through a bridge. Symbolically, in final reckoing 
he has also to cross the 'Pule Sirat' (The celeslial 
bridge of reckoning on the Day of the 
Judgement) . 

E. Hence the man should undertake this journey 
to collect the finest 'Zade Rah' (One's baggage 
in transit) and the goods of the finest good for 
the hereafter. Hence, he has to catch the time 
by the forelock and make hay while the sun 
shines. Even moment lost can not be 
receptured. He may not take the next breath. 

F. Summum bonum, what will stand him in good 
stead is his merchandise of good deeds 
achieved through forestalling the tempting and 
the lustful i.e. by shunning the evil and 
accumulating the true, the pure and pious 
things enroute. Or else, he will suffer miserably 
at the time of 'Jankani' -(Last breaths of life) and 
also not be able to face his Creator on the Day* 
of Judgement. The 'Eiman' (The Staunch Faith 
in Allah) is his principal tool whereby he can 
accomplish his objective. The pleasures of the 
world are tansitory. On the final day, the ruler 
would not be able to gain even an iota of 
virtue, vice all the treasures of his kingdom. 

The man, the ruler should appreciate that if he 
does not conduct himself in conformity with the 
dictates of Allah towards His beings and to him; unto 
whom he has to return, nothing but shame and 
remorse . will be his lot in this world and is the 



hereafter. At the maximum he can live for a hundred 
years or so, in this world. But to conceive of 'Akhirat' 
one has to think in terms of the legendary example oft- 
quoted by the sages to denote the merest glimpse of 
the time span of the eternal 'Akhirat* i.e. 'they say that 
it is like filling up all the seven layers of the heaven 
and the earth with rye corns and asking a sparrow to 
come and collect one rye seed every thousand years, 
till all of it is consumed.' 

As such, how infitisimal the 'Sahanat' (The 
kingdom) of this world is, as compared to the 'Saltanat' 
of the 'Akhirat' can be well imagined. Yet, what a pity 
that with whatever little the ruler possesses in his 
kingdom in this world, he should only be the possessor 
of the shallow and the meanly things! 

Hence, it is incumbent upon the ruler to so 
model his life, as to be able to discharge his 
responsibilities in a befitting manner, by being kind to 
his subjects, looking after this welfare assiduously and 
giving them a fair deal. It will make him and his people 
happy. Put together, it will make the Allah happy and 
if He is happy, the purpose of life is achieved. It is so 
important. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that "a rulers just and pious rule 
over his people is more than sixty years of dedicated 
worship." "That a just king will be the first one 
amongst the seven kind of blessed persons who would 
be installed" on a lofty position under the 'arsh' (The 
Celestial Heaven)." 

"That sixty angels carry the blessings of the 



701 



verity of a just king to the 4 Arsh\" 

"That a just king is close to the Mercy of Allah 
whereas a cruel king is near to His condemnation and 
punishment ('Azaab')." 

"That, I (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) swear by Allah who commands My life that a just 
king is so fortunate that the angels carry all the 
accumulated 'Naikies' (Good deeds) of his subjects for 
his blessing to Allah on Heavens above and^ his 
•Namaz' is equivalent to seventy thousand prayers." 

* 

What can be more blissful than that for a just 
government and how cursed for a regime to the 
contrary. 

The 'Adl' (justice) can be dispensed by a ruler, if 
he takes care of the following ten principal 
considerations. 

I. The first thing that the ruler should always bear 
in mind, is that he should consider himself as 
one of the 'Riyaya' (subjects) and not the king. 
This will enable him to behave in the manner 
with his subjects as he would like to be treated 
by the king. He will thus realise that his acting 
to the contrary is treacherous and unfair. 

In the 'Jange Badar* (The famous battle of 
'Badr') the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) happened to be in the 
shade inadvertently his comrades in combat 
were in the gruelling heat of the sun. Hazrat 
Jibreel Alai Uas Salam (The arch angel Gabriel : 



702 



the messenger of Allah) came and pointed it out 
to Him (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him). 

These sayings of the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) on the subject 
are well known. 

(i) "That a faithful person has the 'Kalima 
Tayyiba' on is. lips as his dying last words 
and during the rest of his life he behaves 
with others as he likes others to behave 
with him." 

(ii) "That a 'Momin' gets up from sleep early 
in the morning with the first thought of 
Allah in his mind. He is neither a 
'Momin' nor a man of any worth if he is 
negligent of his fellow brothers." 

Serving his subjects and attending to their 
requirements and problems is far superior to 
'Nafl Ibadat' (Supererogatory/additional prayers) 
by a ruler. Attending to his people is his first 
priority. He should not have queues of people 
in distress waiting at his door. He should be up 
and doing conscientiously and redress their 
grievances and dispense justice to them, 
expeditiously. 

One day Hazrat Umar Farooq (Allah be pleased 
with him) remained extremely preoccupied into 
the affairs of the state till midday prayers. After 
'Zuhr' he came home and was about to have a 
little nap for momentary respite when his son 
respectfully addressed him and said, " 'Ya Aba' 



703 



(Dear father), you are taking rest here. 'Maut' 
(Death) can come to a man at any moment. It 
is quite likely that people may be waiting for 
you for .the resolution of their problems, 
outside." He liked it and went out to attend to 
his duties. 

The third principle constitutes of making it a 
point to remain away from luxury and levity. 
The ruler should put on simple clothes and 
have simple food. There should be no pomp 
and show, no ostentation. 

One day Hazrat Umar Farooq (Allah be pleased 
with him) asked Hazrat Salman Farsi (Allah be 
pleased with him) for advice. He said, "I have 
heard that as a rule you have two kinds of 
dishes in your meals. I have also heard that you 
wear different dress in the morning and different 
dress in the evening when you come out of 
your house?" Hazrat Umar Farooq thanked him 
profusely but clarified that both of these things 
were not correct. It pleased Hazrat Salman 
Farsi, also (Allah be pleased with him) . 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that "Allah will be 
Merciful and Lenient towards that ruler on the 
Day of Judgement who will be kind and 
compassionate towards his subjects in this 
world." He (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) also prayed to the Almighty "Ya 
Allah, in Your Sublime Mercy be kind to that 
ruler who is kind to his people and harsh to him 
who is harsh to his subjects." This is the fourth 



704 



redeeming virtue that a ruler should adopt 
towards his 'Riyaya'. 

There is an ingenuity of thought about 
'Hukoomat (The rule). Whereas, for the vain 
and the vapid it is a source of self display, 
conceitedness and glamour, it is a great 
responsibility for a God-fearing 'Momin*. Hazrat 
Hashsham Bin Abdul Malik (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
was a much esteemed 'Khalifa' (Ruler) of 'Banu 
Ummiya' (The Banu Ummiade). One day he 
asked Hazrat' Abu Haazim (Rahmatullah Alaih 
one of the 'Ulamae Kubar' - great 'Alims' of the 
day). "How can one get rid of the Hukoomat?" 
Hazrat Haazim wittily replied, "It is fair give and 
take. Whatever price and profit you earn of 
what you give, should be 'HalaF and spent for 
good. You will never regret it.'* Hazrat 
Hashsham asked, "Who can do so?" He 
replied, "A person who is afraid of the 'Azabe 
Qabar' (The punishment for sins after death) yet 
does not shirk his responsibilities and keeps on 
striving and hoping to be forgiven." 

The fifth redeeming principle is that a ruler 
should try and build up a reputation of being 
fair and impartial according to 'Sharaf ('Shari'at' 
: Islamic code of conduct) , to the pleasure of his 
people. He should add a dash of pity to it. 

The Holy Prophet's sermon on the subject is 
self-explanatory, to wit "the best rulers are those 
who are fair and friendly to you and you are 
firendly to them. The worst rulers are those who 
are arrogant, prejudiced and keep on cursing 



705 



and condemning you, with the result that you 
start disliking them." 

There is a lesson in it for the sane 'Hukumrans' 
i.e., the rulers. They should be alert that they do 
not get flattered by the praise of the people. 
Pride hath a fall. It may also be that people may 
consider it a point of protection of their life, 
property and honour, to ostensibly sing praises, 
of a 'Jabir Hukumran' (A cruel ruler). 
Therefore, it is in the interest of the ruler to 
appoint some trustworthy people to keep him 
abreast of the true state of affairs of the people, 
all the while. 

The sixth important thing is that the ruler should 
take care not to compromise the basics i.e. the 
code of the 'Shari'at', to keep his people 
mollified. Personal praise should not overweigh 
the laid down principles of 'Sharah'. 

Hazrat Umar Farooq (Allah be pleased with 
him) used to say "When I get up from my 
'Mimbar' (Pedestal ; Here, Parapit for justice) 
half the people are angry with me. I can't please 
everybody, although I have the welfare of all, at 
heart. However I can not leave aside the 'Raza' 
(The pleasure) of my 'Khaliq' (The Creator) for 
the 'Raza' of the 'Makhlooq', (The people) at 
any cost." 

Once Hazrat Amir Mu'aviya (Allah be pleased 
with him) sent a respectful note to Hazrat 
'A'isha Siddiqa (Allah be pleased with her) 
asking for her invaluable advice. She replied 
back. "I have often heard from the Holy 



706 



Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) that a just 'Khalifa' (A ruler who invokes 
the wrath of the people on him due to his 
fairness and justice (thereby not aiding and 
abetting the wrong) to seek the Mercy of Allah, 
gets it in abundance and makes the 'Makhlooq' 
also to realise his virtue, in the long run. Vice 
versa an unjust ruler summons the anger of the 
people and the Allah, both." 

(VII) The seventh important point for a ruler to 
always keep in mind is, that it is an undertaking 
of great pith and moment to take proper care of 
his subjects. He should remember that it is vital 
responsibility bestowed by Allah on him. If he is 
able to discharge his duty faithfully, he will be 
automatically rewarded by Him. Vice versa, 
there will be noone to save him from the 
retribution, in lieu. 

One day, people saw the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) leaning against the 
'Khana-e-Kaaba' and praying. He (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) told the people present that "as 
long as you keep on doing three things, the 
'Hukoomato Sahanat' (The rule and the realm the 
government) will remain with you. Dispense mercy 
when people seek mercy from you. Perform justice 
between people when they ask for it. Always keep up 
your word of honour. Anyone who acts against it will 
be accursed by Allah and His angels." 

The following sayings of the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) on the 



707 



subject may also be noted. 

"That the curse and condemnation of Allah is 
the fate of that person who is not just between two 
conflicting persons or parties." 

"That Allah the Merciful will never condone 
three kinds of people on the Day of Judgement viz an 
unjust king, an old, adulterer and an arrogant 'Faqir'." 

"That 'Mashriq-o-Maghrib' (The East and the 
West) will be conquered by the Musulmans. But, 
thereafter their 'Hukumrans' (Rulrs) will burn in Hell, 
except the righteous, the pious and the 'Amanatdar' 
(The honest trustees and the dutiful) among them." 

"Tell that man who does not look after his 
'Raiyat' (The subjects) like his own family members, 
that his final abode is in Hell." 

"Two kinds of people will remain devoid of My 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 'Shafa'at' 
(Intervention in mercy) on the Day of Judgement viz a 
savage king and a 'Bidatee' (Evil doer) who may 
surpass the limits in creating mischief and acrimony in 
'Deen'. Specially, the atrocious king would be put to 
terrible 'Azab' on the Day of Judgement." 

"Allah is unhappy with five kinds of people. 
They will meet "Azabe Ilahi* (Punishment by Allah) 
either .in this world or in the 'Akhiraf. 

(i) That ruler who collects his 'Haq' (Right) from 
the people but does not give them their's 
because he is not just and is cruel to them. 



708 



(ii) That 'Raees' (Wealthy person : A leader) who 
does not treat a weak and a strong person 
equally will be punished. 

(iii) A person who is a hard task master to a 
labourer but does not pay him his 
remunerations timely according to his toil. 

(iv) A head of the family. 

a) Who does not inculcate the spirit of 
'Deen' in his family and does not instruct 
them to follow it to that. 

b) Who does not worry about earning an 
honest livelihood for them. 

(v) A person who usurps the 'Mehar' of his wife 
and is cruel to her." 

It is related that one day Hazrat Umar Farooq 
(Allah be pleased with him) wanted to perform the 
funeral prayers of a deceased person when suddenly a 
person darted forward and performed his 'Namaze 
Janaza', instead. After his burial rites were completed 
he put his hand on the dead man's grave and uttered 
these words. "Oh Allah! If you wish to give 'Azab' to 
this man you have command to do so. And if you 
want to reward him, you have full power to do so 
because you are 'Rahim' (Merciful)." Then he 
addressed the deceased and said, "I think there should 
not be much for you to worry about unless you were a 
'Haaklm', his principal assistant, his writ-writer (or writ 
server) or his Tahseeldar' (A revenue officer : A 
district official). Then he vanished from the scene. The 
'Ameerul Momineen' (The Head of the momins) had 



709 



him searched for everywhere but he could not be 
found. Thereafter he said that it was Hazrat Khizar 
Alaihas Salam. Then Hazrat Umar Farooq referred to 
the 'Farman' (The Holy saying : An express order) of 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) whereby He had expressed His regrets over 
such people and had said. "That these people would 
be seen hanging from their hair from the sky on the 
Day of the Judgement. A 'Haakim' (A ruler : A person 
in command : An official) who had control over even 
ten people would be strictly examined and set free only 
when he is proved not guilty." 

Hazrat Umar Farooq (Allah be pleased with 
him) said, "It is a pity that the 'Haakim' of the world 
gets so much beyond himself that he is not afraid of 
the 'Haakim' above, of the skies, the ruler of the 
universe, even." He added that "on the Day of 
Judgement only that 'Haakim' will be 'Surkhroo'; 
(Happy and successful) who will not have resorted to 
undue favouritism of his friends and kith and kin, who 
will have abstained from worldly lust and 
licentuousness and who would not have altered a just 
decision to please anybody." 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has also said that "all the 'Hukmrans' of 
the world would be assembled before the 'Ahkemal 
Hakimeen' (The Greatest Ruler of all) and they would 
be questioned. 'You were the men in lead, you were 
the shepherds of my 'Bandas' i.e. my servants in the 
world. You were the trustees of my treasures there. 
Why did you whip them arbitrarily?' Some of them 
would reply. 'We did so because of your 'Na Farmani' 



710 



(Disobedience). We became angry on it and punished 
them.' Then the Allah would ask them. 'Was your 
anger more than mine?' Likewise Allah would ask 
those who had levied lesser punishment than was 
prescribed (According to 'Hudood')? In turn, they 
would answer that we did so because we felt mercy on 
them.' Allah will ask them. 'Are you more Merciful 
than Me'." Thereafter they would be collected and 
thrown into Hell. 

Hazrat Huzaifa (Allah be pleased with him) used 
to advise people not to praise the 'Hukumrans' (The 
officials of the government). People asked him its 
cause. He replied that it is the (irshad') saying of the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) that "all the 'Hukumrans' whether good or bad 
will be collected and produced before Allah on the Day 
of Judgement. Then they will be made to stand on the 
'Pule Sirat'. Thereupon the Almighty Allah will order 
the 'Pule Sirat' to be given a jolt. Thereupon all the 
cruel, partial dishonest and unjust 'Hukumrans' will fall 
down and would keep on descending down towards 
Hell for seventy years till they reach its bottom, their 
ultimate rendezvous." 

It is in the 'Hadith' that (Prophet David) Hazrat 
Da'ood Alai Uas Satam used to roam • around the 
streets of the city in disguise and used to ask people. 
"What kind of a man is 'Da'ood?" One day the arch 
angel Gabriel also met him similarly ^disguised. As 
used, Hazrat Da'ood (peace of Allah be upon him) 
also asked him the same question. 

Hazrat 'Jibraiel' Alai Uas Salam replied, "If he 



711 

earns his own living and does not take anything from 
the 'Baitul Mai' (The official Treasury), he is a good 
man." When Hazrat Da'ood Alai Uas Salam heard 
this, he came back to his place of worship, crifecT 
bitterly before Allah and beseeched Him to teach him 
some vocation or trade whereby he may also learn to 
earn his living. Allah the Merciful, taught him the art 
and he became an armourer (A maker of 'Zarah'). 

Hazrat Umar Farooq (Allah be pleased with 
him) had the habit of acting the watchman of the place 
or the area where he feared any mischief, so that he 
may be able to act on the spot and nip the evil in the 
bud. He used to say that *as the Amir (Head) of this 
place I have a great responsibility on my shoulders. 
Even if a goat with an itchy skin is found without 
ointrnent on the bank of river 'Furat'. 1 will have to 
account for it on the Day of Judgement.' There is no 
doubt about it, that his sense of justice was proverbial. 
He was extremely cautious. Yet, when he died, Hazrat 
Abdullah Bin Umroo Bin Al'aas (Allah be pleased with 
him) prayed to Allah and said, "Ya Allah! I want to see 
Hazrat Umar in my dream." His desire was fulfilled 
after twelve years. He saw Hazrat Umar in a loin cloth 
as if he had just had a bath. In the dream he asked 
Hazrat Umar (Allah be pleased with him). "How did 
you fair?" He asked Hazrat Abdullah (Allah be pleased 
with him),. "How many years is it, since we parted?" 
Hazrat Abdullah replied, "Twelve years." Hazrat Umar 
(Allah be pleased with him) replied, "It is only now 
that I have become 'Farigt' (Free : Relieved) of my 
reckoning. If Allah had not been most Merciful I wou|d_ 
have been in a dire straits. This is despite the fact that I 
did not possess anything more than a whip, in the 



- * 



712 



instruments of the government." 

Bezar Jumhar sent an ambassador to meet 
Hazrat Umar (peace of Allah be pleased with him) to 
see things for himself and let him know. When he 
reached the 'Madinae Munawwara' he asked people, 
"Where is your king?" People replied, "We don't have 
a king as others do. We have an 'Amir' instead. He 
has just left this place." when he went out he saw 
Hazrat Umar (Allah be pleased with him) lying down in 
the sun, his hunter under his head, perspiring 
profusely. He was most impressed and said to himself 
"so this is Umar whom the world dreads. He does not 
spare anyone and is known for his justice the world 
over. No wonder!" He addressed Hazrat Umar (Allah 
be pleased with him) and said, "You dispense justice. 
That is why you can sleep so fearlessly. Our king is -a 
tyrant. .Hence he remains scared all the time. Your 
'Deen' is true. Now I am sure of it. I if had not come 
here as an 'Ailchi' (Ambassador) I would have 
embraced your Faith straightaway. I will come back 
soon and do so." He did so later. 

That is why we have stated in the beginning of 
this discourse, that to conduct a government is a very 
onerous job. There are many hazards in it. To know 
them and have the 'Ilm' of their solution is thus very 
necessary. Also, it is better for the man in office, the 
'Hukumran' to cultivate the society of 'Deendar Ulema' 
i.e. the Faithful people of learning and wisdom, so that 
they may add to his knowledge, as to how to govern 
better. At the same time it is necessary for him to 
beware of the imposters. They are devils disciples. 



713 



Once Hazrat Shaikh Balakhi (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) went to see 'Khalifa' Haroonul Rashid. He asked 
the 'Khalifa', "Are you a Zahid (A pious person)?" He 
answered, "No. But I am a 'Shafiq (kindly : 
Compassionate) person." Thereupon Hazrat Balakhi 
gave him advice. "Seek company of the pious persons 
and the 'Ulema'. Remember that a singular honour has 
been bestowed on you. You are sitting on the 
'Masnad' (seat of honour) of great people. You are 
sitting on the seat of Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq (Allah be 
pleased with him). You are required by Allah to be 
'Sadiq' and the righteous like him. This seat was also 
occupied by Hazrat Umar Farooq (Allah be pleased 
with him) . You are also enjoined by Allah to 
differentiate between 'Haqo BatiP (The right and the 
wrong) as he was instructed to do. Likewise, you are 
also expected to have the qualities of 'Sharmo Haya' 
(The verity of grace and honour) as Hazrat Usmane 
Ghani (Allah be pleased with him) was honour bound 
to do by Allah, when he sat on this seat before yu. 
What is more, Hazrat All (Allah be pleased with him) 
was also installed on this seat of honour. You too are 
ordained by Allah to dispense justice with 'llmo Adal' 
in the excellent way as he did. Khalifa Haroon-ur- 
Rashid was touched and asked for more guidance and 
words of wisdom. Hazrat Balakhi (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
again started his sermon with the words. "Seek the 
company of the 'Ulema' and 'Ahlullah'. They will be a 
treasure of knowledge and all that is noble, for you." 
He added, "The Almighty Allah has made a house. It 
is called 'Dazakh' (Hell). He has given you three arms 
and made you its 'Sarbaan' (Watchman). You have to 
save yourself and your people from it by the 'Talwar' 
(The sword), Taaziana' (The hunter) and 'Baitul Mai' 



714 

(The official treasury). If a 'Muhtaj' (A destitute person 
: A person in want) comes to you don't let him go 
without adequate aid and succour. Take the 'Na 
Ferman' (Disobedient person) to task with the hunter, 
as instructed. And with the permission of his «Vali' 
(The one incharge : A guardian) remove the head of 
the murderer with the sword. If you don't do this you 
will be the first to enter 'Dozakh' and the rest will 
follow you suit. What a stranage guardian is such a 
person who ruins himself and others also with him?" 
Khalifa Haroon Rashid asked him to say some more 
He added, "You are like a 'Chasma' i.e. chasm of 
clean, pure water. Your tributaries should clean others 
and be a source of cultivation of crops of good for 
them. Don't let it be sullied." 

Khalifa Haroonur Rashid used to call on Hazrat 
Fazeel Bin Ayyaz (Rahmatullah Alaih) along with his 
'Masahib' (companion) Abbasi (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
Each time they used to do so Hazrat Fazeel 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) used to recite this verse of the 
Holy Qur'an. 

Or do those who commit evil deeds think 
that We shall make them as those who 
believe and do righteous deeds, equal 
their living and their dying? How ill they 
judge!.... {45:21 ^ 

Once Khalifa Haroon Rashid was so moved that 
he said "This *Ayat' (Qur'anic verse) is enough for us, 



715 



if we want to take advice and make amends. 
"Threafter Abbasi knocked on the door and asked for 
permission, "Saying the 'Amirul Momineen' (The head 
of the momins) is here to pay his respects." He replied 
from inside. "What can bring him to me?" Abbasi 
replied "So that the 'Amirul Momineen' may seek and 
follow ' your advice." Thereafter Hazrat Fazeel 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) opened the door and doused the 
candle. It was a pitch dark night. Khalifa Haroon 
Rashid started groping his way. While doing so his 
hands got clasped in the hands of Hazrat Fazeel 
(Rahmatullah Alaih). He remarked, "Such soft and 
delicate hands seen earmarked for hell. Haroon! You 
are the leader of the faithful. Don't forget that on the 
Day of the Judgement you will be made to sit with 
each person you have had to deal with and account 
for your conduct. Thereupon Khalifa Haroon Rashid 
started crying vehemently. Thereupon Abbasi asked 
Hazrat Fazeel (Rahmatullah Alaih) to be quiet for a 
while and remarked, "Your words have almost killed 
the 'Amirul Momineen'." Hazrat Fazeel (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) looked at Abbasi and said, "Oh 'Haaman' (From 
the point of view of a chief minister - a chief advisor)! 
You and your comrades have brought him to this 
state, yet you are saying that I have killed him!" 
'Khailfa' Harroon Rashid understood its implication, 
addressed his 'Masahib' Abbasi and told him, "Do you 
realise that on account of you I have been termed as 
'Firaun'?;' Then, he conveyed his profound regrets to 
Hazrat Fazeel (Rahmatullah Alaih) laid down one 
thousand dinars at his feet and respectfully said, "It s a 
humble offering from me. Kindly do me the favour to 
accept it. It is 'Male Halal*. It is from the 'Mehar' of my 
mother." Again Hazrat Fazeel (Rahmatullah Alaih) told 



716 



'Khalifa' Haroonur Rashid, "I am advising you again to 
withdraw your hands in piety from all you possess, as 
'HalaF mixed with 'Haram' is apt to become 
adulterated and return each thing to its rightful owner." 
Thereupon 'Khalifa' Haroonur Rashid bowed his head 
down in aquiesence and returned home. 

Once Hazrat Umar Bin Abdul Aziz (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) asked N Hazrat Majeed Bin Ka'ab Alqarzi 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) to describe 'Adl' Oustice) to him. 
He replied, "If you wish to become an 'AdiF (Dispenser 
of justice), act like a father towards a Muslim who is 
younger to you. Behave -like a son before your senior 
in age. Treat people of your age as your brothers. 
Accord only that much punishemnt to a defaulter 
which is genuinely due to him for that offence. Don't 
let anger or consideratipns of our own piety to take the 
better of you. If you happen to inflict a single extra 
whip upon a person, you will be severely punished for 
it. You are in loco parentis to others. You have a 
grave- responsibility." 

A 'Zahid' (A pious person) happened to go to 
the 'Khalifa-e-Waqf (The caliph at that time). The 
'Khalifa' asked him for some advice. He uttered these 
words of wisdom. "I had gone to 'Cheen' (China). 
Their king had become deaf. People used to see him 
in a state of agony all the time. He used to cry and 
say, "I am not miserable because I have lost the power 
to hear. It is a painful disability but what I am most 
worried about is that I am the king, and I can not hear 
the plaint or plight of people who come to my door 
steps to have their grievances redressed, nor can I hear 
their 'Faryad' (Application for justice or mercy)." 



717 



Therefore he told me that, "as, with the blessings of 
God my eye sight is all right, I am having an express 
announcement made to my subjects that hereinafter, if 
a person is in distress he should come to me clad in 
red. I will try and see what I can do for him. 

Thereafter, the king started roaming around the 
streets of his kingdom on elephant back, looking for 
people in red to resolve their problems. The 'Zahid' 
added, "Mind you, he was a 'Kaafir' yet he was so 
careful of his duties and was merciful towards the 
servants of Allah. You are a Muslim. Realise your 
responsibilities and be kind to your subjects." 

Abu Qulaba (Rahmatullah. Alaih) went to Hazrat 
Umar Bin Abdul Aziz (Rahmatullah Alaih) and 
requested him to say some words of advice to him. He 
told him, "No 'Khalifa' has been left till today since 
Hazrat Adam Alai Uas Salam. Now the first 'Khalifa' to 
die will be you. Hence, realise your position! Beware, 
that you can invoke the Mercy of Allah only when you 
are God-fearing. If Allah is 'Razi' (Happy) with you, 
you have no fear. Vice versa, there is no refuge for 
you." 

A wild thought occured to Hazrat Sulaiman Bin 
Abdul Maalik, one day that "all is well with me so far 
in this world. I don't know what will be my condition 
on the Day of Judgement?" In the meantime he sent 
someone to Hazrat Abu Haazin (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
who was one of the esteemed 'Ulema' of the time, 
with a request to accord him a bit short time from what 
he takes for his 'Iftari' (food taken at the time of 
consummating a fast). He sent him some fried barley 



718 



husk. When he saw it he cried his heart out. The 
comparison was automatically drawn. The answer to 
his euphoria was received. He was so repentent at his 
vain thought that he kept 'Roza' (Fast) for three days 
continuously and opend his fast with the same , Bhoosl' 
(Barley husk) that the venerated saint, Hazrat Abu 
Hazim (Rahmatullah Alaih) had sent to him. His entire 
life was changed after that. He was soon blessed with a 
son i.e. the illustrious Hazrat Umar Alai Uas Salam 
whose 'Adlo Insaf will go into the pages of history, as 
unique and examplary. The 'Ahle Dil' (The 
cognoscenti) are of the opinion that this singular 
blessing was the reward of his change of heart and fear 
of Allah. 

Hazrat Umar Bin Abdul Aziz (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) was busy in Taubao Astaghfar', one day. 
People asked him the reason of his doing penance. He 
shivered and replied, "One day I was beating my slave 
over a trifle. I was angry. He told me. 'Kindly 
remember that night, after which the Day of 
Judgement will dawn.' It has touched me a lot. I am 
repentant since then." 

Once a 'Shaibe DiP (A pious and soulful person) 
saw 'Khalifa' Haroonur Rasjiid standing bare footed, 
bareheaded on a burning boulder under a scorching 
sun in 'Madane Arafat'. He was seeing upwards, his 
hands cupped aloft in reverent prayer. He was saying 
"Oh Allah! You are 'Arhamur Rahimeen' (The only 
and the most Merciful). Your Mercy is unique. I am a 
perpetual sinner. I keep on committing evil. Your 
nobility is sublime. You keep on forbearing my sins 
most compassionately. Have mercy on me, my Lord 



719 



and Master! The 'Buzurg' (A senior : A respected 
person) remarked. "See. The 'Jabbar' (Autocrat) of this 
world is asking for Mercy from the 'Jabar' of the 
universe!" 

One day Hazrat Umar Bin Abdul Aziz 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) requested Hazrat Abu Hazzam 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) to give him a word of advice for 
his good. He said, "Leave your comfortable beds. Start 
sleeping on the ground. Always keep in mind that you 
have to die one day." It is in the interest of all 
'Hukumrans' to remember the foregoing. These 
'Hikayats' are very telling, very trenchent and thought 
provoking. At the same time the 'Ulema' of the time 
should keep on overseeing them and putting them on 
the right path by word and gesture. Let the 'Ulema' 
not get away with the thought that as 'Hukoomat' is 
not their forte, they need not worry about it. 

It is necessary for the 'Hukumran' to make sure 
that not only he himself but his assistants and servants 
assigned to public duty should also behave themselves 
and tread on the right path. The 'Hukumran' should 
keep on monitoring them and taking them to task for 
their highhandedness. 

The living example is that once Hazrat Umar 
Farooq (Allah be pleased with him) sent a strongly 
worded letter to. his governor Hazrat Abu Musa Ash'ari 
(Allah be pleased with him). It said, "A good 
'Hukumran' is he, who is just. His people know him 
and are pleased with him. Vice versa a bad 
'Hukumran's' subjects are always weary of his 
inattention or his injustice. 



720 



If you become engrossed in the attractions of 
this world to the detriment of your charge and 
responsibility your 'Ummal' (Assistants in government) 
will follow you suit. Then your condition will become 
like that of an animal who starts over grazing as soon 
as he sees a pasture so that he may become fat. This 
obscenity is always the cause of his death. People slay 
the animal and make a merry meal of him." 

It is written in the Toraif (Holy Torah ordained 
on Prophet Moses, (peace of Allah be upon him) that 
if a 'Haakim' - a ruler (An official incharge) remains 
wantonly indifferent to the atrocities and misdeeds of 
his 'AamiP (Assistant : Functionary), his misdeeds are 
also ascribed to the ruler. He is punished for them. 

Hence, the ruler will not be able to get away 
from it if his 'Ammal' keep on cheating the public, 
fleecing them, taking bribe from people, intimidating 
them or harrasing tham on one pretext or the other. 
Actually they are the 'Khidmatguzars' of people, not 
their masters. Nor for that matter is the ruler their 
master. He is actually the servant of his people more 
than his functionaries. Hence, how unfortunate is that 
ruler who fritters away his life's worth by being 
negligent himself, of his 'Aamils' and most vital of all, 
of his people. The *AqP should guide him to take 
adequate steps, at all stages. For, 'Aql' i.e. the wit is a 
semblance of angelic traits. Who should overpower 
whom, the 'Lashkar' (Forces) of Allah or the 'Lashkar' 
(The forces) of Satan? Lust, lasciviousness and 
unscrupulous anger are the participants of the 'Lashkar' 
of the Satan. Hence why should the 'Hukamran' 
succumb to them at the cost of his life, the life of his 



721 

'Ahlkars' (Functionaries) and the life of his people (His 
subjects) against the forces of 'Iblees' (The principal 
fallen angel) . 

The sun of 'Adal Parasti' ; (Justice) should dawn 
first in the heart of the ruler. It's rays should then 
diverge to his family, friends and fellow beings. If the 
sun shines in its full brilliance, there can be no dearth, 
depravity or darkeness. On the contrary, if a person in 
position of power stays his hands to mete out fair play 
and justice to others; for personal interests, or for other 
petty considerations of the world as against the dictates 
of Allah, he will neither get the respect of the people 
nor the reward of Allah. Rigorous retribution will be his 
fate. He will neither get this world, nor the 'Akhirat'. 
An easy comfortable morsel of food will lead a world- 
seeker alone, nowhere. He will be merely like animal. 
If dashing, clothes attract the person, the man will be 
more like a woman than a man for, the beautification 
and ornamentation of self is the trait of women, 
not men. If a person's ego gets satisfied by torturing 
others with his anger, where is the different between 
him and the beast? If it pleases an amongst official to 
see people bowing down before him like serfs, singing 
false praises; all the time, all around, such ostentation 
will get him nowhere. The 'Aqils' will be left with no 
other alternative buf to act as his 'Khadims' (servants) 
in peril of their lives, but all this would be to please the 
'Haakims' 'Khawhish' (wish, not too please Allah. How 
can such a 'Haakim' please Allah when he smashes His 
people? 

Hence the verity of th 'AdF (Justice) lies in 
following the 'Farman' (Order) of Allah and not giving 



722 



baits to people in the form of 'Rozeena* (Daily 
allowance) to some or 'Khalaat' (Prize) to other. The 
sensible ruler should know that such acts don't cut 
much ice, in the long run. For instance, if the rumour 
spreads that, that ruler's regime is likely to be toppled, 
people will leave him. 'Adl' lies in 'Khidmat' and 
•Bandagi'. The sane know it. Those who refute it go 
straight to hell. 

Pride and anger go together. The tenth 
essentiality is that the 'Hukumran* should not be 
arrogant. Conceitedness and wrath make the man 
vengeful. Such a person can always be up to a 
vendetta fend of sorts with somebody or the other on 
personal whims and caprices. On the contrary, virtue 
lies in 'Afvo Darguzar' (Kindness and compassion) . An 
'Adil' is always sober and sedate. He feels the weight 
of responsibility all the time, on his shoulders. He 
never crosses the limits. He excels in this position when 
he visualises that 'I am placed in the position of honour 
of the 'Anbia' (Prophets), 'Aulia' (The venerated 
friends of Allah) and 'Sahabae Karam' (Allah be 
pleased with them) who were such exalted 
personalities, hence I should discharge my duties most 
faithfully.' It is foolish to act otherwise. 

Sometimes action and counter-reaction interact. 
When a 'Hukmran' is harsh, the accused or the 
offended person or party protest even more harshly. 
This strong interplay of sentiments provoked by the 
'Hakim' makes the 'Mahkoom' lose his temper. It is 
tantamount to losing the balance. It makes the 
'Hukmaran' angry. At times, he becomes wild with 
rage and inflicts undue punishments. He goes 



723 



overboard. There is a 'Hikayat' (An ancedote) to this 
effect i.e. one day 'Khalifa'; Abu Jaffar awarded death 
penalty to a person. By chance, Hazrat Mubarak Bin 
Fazala (Rahmatullah Alaih) happened to be there, at 
that time. He intervened and quoted a 'Hadith'. He 
said that the Tarman* (An order : A holy dictate or 
saying) of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) reaching us through Hazrat Hassan 
Basri (Rahmatullah Alaih) is "that a heralder would call 
out aloud before Allah on the Day of Judgement that 
'If anyone can dare to stand up before Allah, let him 
do so.' But nobody would be able to do so except 
those persons who might have forgiven the faults of 
others in the world." When the 'Khalifa' heard this he 
said, "Release him. I have forgiven him." 

So if the vain 'Hukmarans* tend to accord 
severe punishments to people because they are angry 
because their ego, their vanity is hurt, then at that time 
these persons should keep in mind what Hazrat Isa 
Alai Uas Salam (The holy Christ) had said to prophet 
Yahyah Alai Uas Salam. It is that "if a man tells the 
truth, thank Allah for it. If he tells a .lie be more 
grateful to Allah, for, you being the victim and he the 
aggressor you would be uetter placed and the angels 
will write a plus point in your favour in your 'Namae 
Aamal' ; (Record-book of man's performance)." 

Once people praised a person highly before the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) and said that such and such person is very 
powerful. He, (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) asked them "what kind of a person is he?" They 
replied, "He is so mighty that he defeats everybody in 



724 



wrestling." The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) observed that "he is the most 
powerful person, who can overpower his anger." The 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) elaborated that " 'Eiman' has great power. And 
' when a person attains three attributes his 'Eiman' 
(Staunch irrevocable Faith in Allah) becomes perfect 
i.e. when a person is angry he should control it and 
abstain from rest retaliation. Likewise when a man is 
really happy he should not forget the rights to be 
fulfilled in his merriment. And when he has the power 
and competence, he should not take more than what 
is due to him." 

It is the saying of Hazrat Umar Farooq (peace of 
Allah be upon him) that "Do not pin your faith on 
anyone unless you have tested him in the state of 
anger. Also do not be sure of the factum of the 'Deen' 
of anyone unless a person proves his worth against 
temptatio'n and avarice." 

One day somebody abused Hazrat All Bani Al 
Hussaini (Rahmatullah Alaih) when he was going to 
the mosque. The servants wanted to thrash him for it 
but he stopped them, addressed the felon and said, 
"The sins and faults of mine that are not in your 
knowledge are far more than what you have abused 
me for. If I can be of any more service to you, do let 
me know?" He gave him the robe that he was wearing 
and asked his 'Ghulams' to also give him a thousand 
dinars also. The abuser was sorely ashamed of himself. 
He went away calling aloud. "I can swe,ar that he is a 
'Farzande Rasool' (From the Holy lineage of the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him)." 



725 



The other 'Rivayet* is also about him. One day 
he called his 'Ghulam' but he did not reply. He called 
him again. Again he gave no answer. Then he said, 
"Don't you hear me?" He replied, "I heard you." He 
asked, "Then why did you not answer back?" He 
replied, "Due to your 'Husne Akhlaq' (The grandeur of 
your conduct). I knew you won't be angry. He 
thanked Allah and said, "Oh Allah! I am grateful Mi 
servant is not afraid of me." 

Hazrat Ali Bani-al-Hussain's (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
servant broke the leg of a goat, one day. He asked the 
•Ghulam', "Why did you do it?" He replied, "I did so 
purposely to infuriate you, as I have never seen you 
lose your temper." He answered, "All right, now I am 
going to make him (The 'Iblees') annoyed with you, 
who tempted you to do so" and set him free. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that "some people attain the 
status of 'Saimu Dahar' (The most patient) and 'Qaimul 
Lail' (Those in night vigil in worship of Allah) due to 
perpetual tolerance and sobriety of temperament. On 
the contrary many people are apt to be short 
tempered. They are called 'Jabirs' although their rule is 
limited to their homes only." 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has also said that "there is a door of 
'Dozakh' (The Hell) from which only those people will 
enter it, who get angry 'Khilafe Sharah' (Against the 
Shari'at)." 

There is a Rivayat that one day 'Iblees' came to 
Hazrat Moosa Alai Uas Salam (Prophet Moses) and 



726 



asked him to beg three things from Allah if he wants to 
succeed. He asked *Iblees\ "What are they?" He 
replied they are known to you also but I am spelling 
tham out to you. 

(i) That people should abstain from anger. It is fast 
and light. I play with it at will as the children 
play with a ball. 

(ii) Similarly, people should not get Involved with 
women. They are my principal dependable bait. 

(iii) That people should not have lust for money 
and be money grabbing and Shylocks, because I 
succeed in ruining their 'Dunya-o-Akhirat', 
easily. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) once remarked that "it is better for a 
person in power, who can display his temper, to 
control it with fortitude. Allah will fill his heart with 
peace and 'Eiman'." 

The following sayings of the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) are very 
important. 

A rich, God-fearing person who wantonly does 
not wear 'Ubase Fakhira' (Dress of honour and 
position) in humility to Allah is rewarded by Taqwa' 
(Piety) by Allah. 

He is deplorable indeed who is in the habit of 
unleashing his wrath on people without having the fear 
of the wrath of Allah on him. 



727 



Once a faithful requested the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) to give him 
some advice so that he may be able to go to 'Jannat' 
He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) replied: 

(i) Control your temper. * 

(ii) Do not extend your hand towards another 
person for anything, as far as possible. 

(iii) Say your prayers regularly. Say 'astaghfar* (Do 
penance of one's sins) to Allah seventy times 
after the 'Asr' prayers. Allah will forgive your 
sins of seventy years, in lieu." 

Hazrat Abdullah Bin Mas'ood (Allah be pleased 
with him) said that one day a person had the audacity 
to raise an objection before the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) regarding his 
share of the 'Mai' that He (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) was distributing to people with His own 
hands. People saw that the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) face became crimson. 
He looked so hurt. However, he did not say anything 
except "may Allah have Mercy on you." He (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) also added, "May 
Allah have Mercy on Moosa Alai Uas Salam (Prophet 
Moses) and reward him as people hurt him far more 
than it and he was patient." 

We closing this chapter with these 'Hikayat', 
sermons and valid discourse on this subject that people 
will take a lesson from them and from the 'Ahadith' 
and Qur'anic verses that we have hither to quoted to 
make things as lucid as possible. The main thing is to 
engrain piety in the heart, have fear of Allah and 



728 



model one's life and conduct in such a way that the 
man is blessed with 'Elman' and Taqwa'. A superficial 
approach to life, with erratic conduct is of no use. The 
man is very forgetful. He gets so engrossed in the 
dinars and the 'Dunya* to such a pitch that the 
principal consideration viz his 'Akhirat* becomes 
obscure to him and that is precisely what he has to 
forestall. The man should always keep his death and 
the Day of Judgement in his mind. Neglect 
undermines the 'Eirnan' severely. 

THE STAGES IN MAN'S LIFE WHICH IMPAIR 
HIS 'AKHIRAT THE BLESSINGS OF 'AKHLAQE 
HASSANA' (VERITABLE CONDUCT) 

The finest of the finest! Allah the Beneficient has 
honoured the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) with the following compliment par 
excellence, in these words. 

And then art surely of a magnificent 
character. (68 : 4) 

The 'Akhlaqe Hassana' constitutes of veritable 
conduct of man towards everybody. It implies being 
sober, amiable, chaste, with a pleasant demeanour, 
sympethetic, helpful, sincere, a man of one's word,' 
fair, just, kind, pious, firendly, respectful to the elders 
and seniors, sedate and sober etc. 

* 

The elegant sayings of the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) on this subject are 



729 



reproduced below. These are self explanatory. 

"The Allah has sent Me (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) to complete the prescribed conduct 
of man on the earth. The 'Akhlaqe Hassana' will 
overwiegh all other things in the 'Balance' (The eternal 
weighing scale) on the Day of Judgement." 

One day a person paid his respects to the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
and asked, "Ya Rasoolullah what is 'Deen'. He (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) replied, " 
'Akhlaqe Alaia' (The best demeanour and conduct)." 
He kept on asking this question repeatedly but each 
time He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
gave him the same answer and added, "Believe me 
this is the 'Deen' and don't get frustrated." 

People asked the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) , "What are 'Behtareen 
Aamal' (The best acts)?" He replied 'Aklaqe Hassana' 
(Veritable conduct)." 

Somebody asked the Holy Prohet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) to give him some 
advice. He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "Whereever you are have the fear of Allah in 
your heart." He asked for more. The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) said, "After 
every bad deed hurry up to perform a good deed so 
that virtue may eradicte the evil." He respectfully asked 
for some more. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) added, "Treat the 'Makhlooq' 
(The creation : The people) of Allah with 'Husne 



732 



According to Hazrat Katani (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
'Soofipun' and 'Naikkhooi' are akin to each other i.e. 
to be good natured is to be like a 'Soofi'." Hazrat 
Yahya Bin Ayaz (Rahmatullah Alaih) used to say that 
"bad manners are so devastating that a worshipper's 
veneration and reverence in prayer is marred by it, 
whereas a person has 'Husne Akhlaq' in him always 
succeeds in bringing the sins to bay." 

MORE ABOUT THE EXCELLENCES OF 
'AKHLAQE HASSANA' 

'Akhlaqe Hassana' is such a varied and vast 
subject that various 'Ulema' have described its verity in 
different words and in different ways. Some have 
termed it as 'Kushada Rooy' (Pleasantness of 
demeanour). Others have called it, to take the 
sufferings of others on one's self and relieving them of 
their pangs by making sacrifices for them. A class of 
'Ulema' think that it constitutes of not taking revenge 
on one's enemies. Naturally, these individual traits 
form a part of 'Akhlaqe Hassana' and are not all of it. 
Each one of them is a drop in the ocean. 

Actually the 'Jism' i.e. the body of the man 
which can be seen with the naked eye and the 'Rooh' 
viz the soul which is not visible as such, both contribute 
to the 'Akhlaqe Hassana' individually and collectively. 
'Akhlaqe Hassana' is 'Ibadat' (worship of Allah). It has 
been repeated by the sages several times over the 
years, that much verity is obtained; by using the 
'Quvate Ilm' (The power of knowledge and Learning) 
and 'Khashm' (Authority and control), over the 
undesirable traits, specially over 'Shahwat' (Sensual 



733 



urges : The base desires) to establish 'Adl' (Justice) and 
its resultant unbiased humane behaviour with one and 
all, to give the term 'Husne Akhlaq' (The beauty of 
character and behaviour) its meaning of pleasing 
conduct with human beings. 

It is logical that the 'Quvate Ilm' which is always 
harnessed by the ration in man; enabling him to 
differentiate between the good and bad, spurred by a 
soul saturated with the love of Allah and His beings 
gives him the required 'Sagacity'" the 'Hikmat' to 
conduct himself in an unprejudiced manner with 
charity for all and malice towards none. This 'Hikmat' 
is an estimable source of all blessings, as the Almighty 
Allah has ordained in the 'Holy Qur'an'. 

( r i * : fl^Ji) ° Ji 'o* J 

And whoso is given the Wisdom is given 
much good.... (2:169) 

Likewise, when it comes to the 'Quvate Ghazab' 
(The overruling power of condemning the evil), this 
power is to be used to suppress the devil in man. 

(i) By remaining in the confines of the code of 
conduct of the 'Shari'at'. 

(ii) By overcoming the savage, the sensual and self 
aggrandising urges. 

The 'Ghazab' is like a hunting dog, while 
'Shahwat' can be compared to an unruly horse. Hence 
when the aforementioned traits combine in man he 
attains the quality of 'Naik Khooi' (Good naturedness) . 



734 

The redeeming feature of this 'Naik Khooi' is that it is 
based on 'Naik Niyyati' (Good intentions). Unless these 
traits conjoin in man, he can not have 'Husne Akhlaq' 
To illustrate it by an example, if certain organs of 
man's body are well formulated and some are not 
uniformly congruous wilh' them, he will look 
conspicuous and even hideous. Hence the concept of 
'Husne Akhlaq' conveys the uniformity of good 
characteristics. 



'Shair'at' enforces the necessary checks and 
balances. The man is frail. To be a sensible person is 
one thing but to be an ove' clever person is another. 
Likewise, to be self contained, sedate and sober is 
quite different to be a tane, timid or an inspirid 
person. Likewise, to be instgating and quarrelsome is 
in absolute antithesis to the battle in 'Jehad-e-Fe 
Sabeelillah' (Fighting for, anc in the cause of Allah). 

In the same manner to be thankful to Allah for 
his bounties of health, wealti and power is one thing 
but to become proud and overbearing with peope - to 
look down upon the poor ar d Tuqara' is an other A 
God-fearing rich man will walk the Allah's earth in 
humility; thanking the Allah for his affluence with 'Male 
Halal* with each breath, givhg 'Zakat' and charity in 
His way, whereas a vain and a boorish person will 
become just the opposite of :t and a living terror and 
menace for the down-trodden. Summum bonum if 
the man follows the 'Shari'al' and maintains a good 
balance in the pre-requisities of the 'Akhlaqe Hassana, 
he would become a blessed person as described by the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him); 



735 



There is a world of difference between the good 
and the bad. They are poles apart. They are different 
banks of a river but when we come to think of it, if the 
mean is maintained, the balance is kept up in things on 
the basic principles of 'Shari'at' and good conduct, 
then we find that there is a fine hair line separating the 
two. The middle course is the best course. To go 
overboard, indulge in extremism and ignore the norms 
of prescribed behaviour is very harmful. Allah has 
forbidden it. For instance Allah has ordained in the 
Holy Book. 

(nV:0ti>Ji) Outy'dJi 

Who, "when they expend are neither 
tasteful nor niggardly; surely between that 
is the just stand. (25 : 67) 

Allah the Merciful has also addressed the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
and proclaimed. 

And keep not thy hand chained to the 
neck,'nor spread it all widespread.... 

(17 : 29) 

Then do remember that the real 'Naik Khooi' 
(Being good: Good natured) is that in which there is a 
proper balance between things. The real beauty lies in 
all organs of the, body being proportionately 



736 



wellmodulated. Seen in this light people are usually of 
four principal kinds. 

(i) Those who have :hese virtues in heapful 
measure. People should take a leaf out* of their 
book. It's finest example is that of the Holy 
Prophet (peace and Messings of Allah be upon 
him) . In his days Haa at Yousuf Alai Uas Salam 
(Prophet Joseph) wai also blessed with 'Husne 
Soorat* and 'Husne Scerat', both. 

(ii) In absolute antithesis, there are those who are 
full of evil traits. They are the Satan's 
representatives. They should be kept at a safe 
distance. 

(iii) The third category of people is between them 
both but a little more disposed towards the 
good. 

(iv) The people of the fourth category are also 
likewise placed i.e. th«iy are an intermixture of 
good and bad both, but with a greater 
inclination towards the bad. 

As such the verity oi 'Husne Akhlaq' lies in 
balanced behaviour. If one has the 'Husne Soorat' as 
well as the 'Husne Seeraf, tru-re is nothing like it. But 
in reality it is in 'Husne Seercit' i.e. in noble, veritable 
conduct without an axe to giind that the real 'Husn' 
(The beauty) lies. 'Husne Akhlaq' does not only imply 
being good to others but is tased on the mandatory 
fact that he should be good himself to begin with and 
his 'Husne Akhlaq' should gen jine and veritable. 



737 



IT IS POSSIBLE TO CREATE VIRTUOUS TRAITS 

Some people are of the opinion that after one 
has grown up, he does not change bodily i.e. his 
features remain the same. A short statured person 
remains the same as a tall person remains of the same 
size. They also say that an ugly person can not 
become beautiful nor can a handsome person become 
ugly in normal course. They go to the extent of saying 
likewise the human conduct which is the facsimile of 
his 'Batin' also does not alter. But this theory is not 
altogether correct. Had it been so, working hard on a 
parson to teach him etiquette, good manners and to 
give him advice how to behave himself in society 
would have been an excercise in futility. The fact is 
that the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has said: 

"Beautify your habits." 

This saying of the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) puts the stamp on the 
issue. Surely, if even the animals can be tamed and 
taught, why can man not be? Of course, there are two 
aspects to it i.e. things vary according to their status. 

(i) For instance, there are certain things which are 
impossible i.e. one can not produce an apple 
with the seed of a walnut or some other fruit. 
But, a fruit can be grown with its own seed. 
When its plant starts sprouting it can be tended, 
nurtured and generally looked after till one is 
able to eat its fruit. Therefore the sages have 



Tc8 

said that in the same manner it is not possible to 
pullout human trait; like the anger and the 
sensuality from the raots. However they can be 
tamed and brought under control with hard 
work and counselling. It has been proved by 
practical experience. Things can thus be 
normalised. Of couise, this experiment varies 
with various people. One has to exert a lot with 
some people. Nevertheless, all people are not 
alike. 

(■V : . . . .IjU j lj» 

Guard yourselves and your families 
against a Fire. . . . (66 : 6) 

There are some simple people. They are very 
innocent. They are so naive that they hardly 
know what is good or bad. They learn things 
easily. They are not v/anton, habitual defaulters. 
A good 'Murabbi' (Trustee : Teacher : Reformer 
: Wellwisher) who takes care to keep him in the 
dark about ('Gunah') the evil can do so much 
for them. All childrer are like that. It is lack of 
care on the part of th eir parents that sometimes 
mars their unpretentious innocence. The safety 
of 'Deen' and their ch aracter is the responsibility 
of their parents. The Almighty Allah has 
accordingly ordained. 

In the second category, comes that man who 
may as yet not have become 'Bud Aqeeda' (An 
ill believer) but may have started indulging in 
bad things, knowing fully well that they are evil. 



739 



It is more difficult to bring him to the right path. 
It would require two prolonged attempts to 
dissuade him from the wicked deeds and at the 
same time saw the seed of the good and 
virtuous conduct in him. If he starts responding 
to it, he will become chaste and charitable. 

(iv) The fourth kind is rather hard to tackle. His 
rectification and reform becomes a hard nut to 
crack as he likes the evil so much that he gets 
used to it instinctively, irrespective of its moral 
values. 

(v) The people of the fifth category are those who 
surpass the limits. A man of this kind becomes 
so degenerate that he has the audicity to flaunt 
his depravity before others. He takes pride in 
evil and boasts. He says 'I have killed so many 
people, or 1 have taken so many bottles of 
liqour unless' a miracle happens, there is very 
little likelihood of rectifying and rehabilitating 
such a miscreant. 

THE TREATMENT OF THE FELONS 

It is obvious that the best way to treat cruel is to 
be good and guide them to the opposite direction of 
whereto they are headed. An antidote counteracts. It is 
a medicine given to remove the poison. The face of 
the person going in the wrong direction is changed to 
its opposite direction i.e. the right direction. Once this 
is done, he is made to traverse the course. He is 
constantly supervised and encouraged. 

It is so. The antonym of heat is cold. Th£ 



740 



medicine for ailment like anger lies in compassion, 
forbearance and charity. The treatment of the,discease 
of arrogance is in humility. The dose of 'Akle HalaP x . 
makes a thief, a dacoit healtiy. His hands don't have 
to be cut off. 

Constant counselling and practical application 

become habit forming until it becomes a second nature 
with the man. The verity of good makes him respected 
in society. Vice versa the ruin of the bad habits is so 
catastrophic that one shudders to even think of it. 

What is more, the 'Akle Hatel' (Honest livelihood) and 
fear of Allah make the erstwnile barbaric king and the 
barber, both proud of themselves. The sweeper is 
equally happy earning an honest living. The dignity of 
labour becomes manifest. 

Hence, when 'Khilafs Taba' (Against one's 
inherent nature) things take ihe shape of good habits 
in man, things become easier for him. So much so, 
that by constant cultivation of the good in man, he 
becomes inclined to seek the 'Marafat' (The 
cognizance) of Allah, in His obedience. He starts riding 
the human wrath and recklessness of lust as a gallant 
person does a horse. The evil is a sickness of body and 
soul. Just like a sick person wants to take the very 
things that are forbidden to him for the health and 
welfare of his body, a similarly ailing soul of man wants 
to partake of that which he should not. The more 
indiscretions he commits, the sicker he becomes, as 
Allah has ordained in the Holy Book. 



741 



There is a sickness in their hearts.... (2 : 10) 

Consequently, the heart that is not sick is 
popular with Allah the Merciful and is blessed. 



In the same manner as a sick body is in danger 
in this world, an ailing soul is in danger in the next 
world. The secret of the 'Ilaj' i.e. the treatment of a 
man sick in body is in consulting a Tabeeb' (A 
physician) and in taking sour medicines against his will. 
Likewise, a peson with a sick soul should take avail of 
a 'Sahibe Sharah-o-Sahibe DiP (A man of Shari'at and 
a saintly person) for the treatment of the sickness in his 
heart. The principle is the same for both i.e. just as 
cold is the antidote for heat and the heat for the cold, 
in the same manner a person who is suffering from 
arrogance should take the pbtion of fear of Allah and 
meakness. He will recover soon. 

It is said that three things contribute to 'Akhlaqe 
Hassana'. 

(i) The first of these is the Blessing of Allah i.e. 
some are born good. Some say it is hereditary. 
We will still call it a singular Blessing of Allah. 

(ii) The second thing is the cultivation of good and 
constantly checking the bad, till such time as the 
man acquires the good, habitually. It's grand 
finale is that the man's conscience starts taking 





Except for him who comes to Allah with a 
sincere heart. (26 : 89) 



742 



pride in it, in extreme humility to Allah. 

(Hi) The blessedness of the third kind also lies in 
sitting in the company of the people blessed by 
Allah and acquiring their traits, in collecting 
treasure of wisdom an d sagacity from them and 
getting fascinated by their virtues, that the man 
becomes a virtuous person of quality himself. 

He is indeed very 'Nak Bakht' (Fortunate) who 
is able to accumulate all three of these prizes. 
Vice-versa the man wh o is not able to have any 
of them is very 'Bad Bakt' (Unfortunate). 
Nevertheless the status of 'Sa'aadat' (The 
blessing) and 'Shaqawat-' (111 fortune) of people 
varies according to their own efforts and 
contributing factors "to this effect. Allah the 
Omnipotent has said. 

jjj JUtu J** j & JUu J** j*J 

(A<V : JijljJt) 0«J>'j± 

That they may be shown their works. 
Then whoso has done an atom's weight of 
good shall see it, and whoso has done an 
, atom's weight of evil shall see it. (99 : 7,8) 

It should be remembered that whereas the 
appreciable acts get performed by the man bodily, as 
the eya can see them and senses can perceive them, 
their prime mover should actually be the feeling heart. 
And since the heart is the gallant rider that mounts the 
body in their journey through life, its verity lies in its 
Mamalo KamaF (Beauty and excellence). It is only then 
that in its vivid lucidity he may be able to see the 



743 



'Malakooti' (Angelic) forms in a Paradise like splendour 
in its 'Safar' towards the 'Maraft' of Allah. We have 
already stated that the man's body pertains to 'Alame 
Shahadat' (The realm of physical factum) whereas his 
soul belongs to the 'Alame Malakoot' (The angelic 
realm). Nevertheless, the grandeur of man's 
ascendance rests in the conjoined efforts for an 
eminent 'Akhirat*. Every good act that a man performs 
in the love and cause of Allah creates a 'Noor' 
(Celestial enlightenment endowed by Allah) in his 
heart. In antithesis, every bad act committed by man 
physicaly, darkens his heart. The seeds of 'Sa'aadat' 
and the 'Germs' of 'Shaqawat' emanate from what Is 
introduced to the heart by man's good or bad deeds, 
respectively. Summing up the debate, one comes to 
the foregone conclusion that 'as you sow, so shall you 
reap.' 

For instance, 'Kitabat' (Calligraphy) is actually 
more of a characteristic de merit of the heart than of 
the fingers. Hence, if a person desires to improve his 
art, he will have to do it with more dedication and 
'Takalluf, so much so, that the art forms he may 
produce may be imprinted on his* heart. In doing so 
the man's fingers would be transcribing them from the 
heart on to the paper or the canvas. In the same way 
with the conjugation of the heart with the body good 
deeds of worth come into being. The man's 'Takkaluf 
brings out the best in man in this manner. The more 
enriched the heart is with the verity of whatever 'Naiki' 
it wants to do, the more blessed the consequent action 
performed becomes. Later comes the stage when it 
starts sparkling with Allah's 'Noor'. What a 
transformation. The thing that starts with 'Takalluf and 



714 



contrivance in the beginning, becomes a heaven of 
Allah's blessings. It starts doing deeds with 'Raghbat' 
and devotion that springs from within. But 'Ghaflat' 
i.e. the neglect of the heart is a. different thing 
altogether. The performance of the body in such a 
state is niggardly. 

If a patient has pneumonia, it does not mean 
that he should eat things, hi any quantity he likes. For 
that matter, some of them nay be injurious to him and 
even those things which are considered useful in this 
disease may prove hazardous to his health, if they are 
taken in what is called an over dose. As a matter of 
fact, all such things are prescribed in quality and 
quantity both. There has goi to be a balance. 

In the same manner, the 'Akhlaqe Insani' (The 
human conduct) has two opposite extremes and the 
middle course comprising the balanced mean between 
the two. In these poles apat, one is 'Mahmood' (The 
veritable) and the other is 'Mazmoom' (Deplorable : 
Extreme : Unscrupulous). Oi course, the central course 
is moderate and temperate. It has equilibrium, stability 
and poise. Actually, that is what is precisely required. 

It stands to reason that to except of a 'Bakheel' 
(A miserly, Stingy person) to be charitable is asking, 
more than he is fit for, as h<i is on the extreme and of 
being Mazmoom' (Deplorable ) same as a person who is 
in the habit of 'Asraf (Extravagance - : Wastefulness). 
He too is on the wrong end. The 'Shari'at' has 
condemned both of these traits. Unless they come to 
the 'Itidal' (The balanced behaviour) the verity of good 
conduct wjll not be achieved. That is where the 



745 



foregoing 'Ilaj' (The treatment) comes into force to 
remedy their inherent defects and bring them on, to 
behave with equilibrium. 

That is why the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has given the 
efficacious advice to the 'Ummah' "to comply with 
Allah's orders happily in an inspired spirit. If necessary, 
these dictates of the AJmighty should be followed with 
'Jabr' (Force) on one's self but there should be no 
disobedience." However, as elucidated earlier 'Khairat' 
i.e. the 'charity' in the name of Allah fountains up like 
a 'Chashma' (chasm) of clean sweet water from the 
heart. A Shylock is the last person of whom such a 
noteworthy virtue may be expected. 'Bukhl' (Being 
mean : miserly : Money grabbing) becomes his 'Aadate 
Sania' (Second nature). Such persons are cowards. 
There is no tenacity in their hearts for Allah and His 
servants, and the 'cowards die a thousand times before 
their death whereas the valiants taste of death but only 
once. That is why it is repeated over and over again 
that if the man gives his reins in the hands of the 
'Shari'at' he would be much better off. 

: frUJI) C yJnft Uj» br^y ^fc -i fli l 'J'k" 

No, by thy Lord, they do not believe, until 
they make thee the judge on controversies 
between them, then do not find in 
themselves any impediment in what thou 
decrees.... (4 : 65) 



746 

There is a secret, a rr ystique hidden in it, which 
can not be fully elucidated. However we shall dwell on 
it briefly; here, to wit, the grandeur of man lies in the 
man becoming endowed wilh angelic traits. Hence his 
grand finale is inherent in his reaching his destination 
of the 'Akhirat' blessed as such, without the inhibiting 
characteristics of worldly list and other depravities, 
which these pious angels of Allah do not possess. It is 
the zenith of glory for msn Jo reach this elevated 
status. In any case, as long as the man strikes the 
balanced mean; follows the middle course, does not 
expose himself to too much heat or too much cold 
bordering on extremes bit remains in temperate 
conditions, he is better of : , as he remains in the 
sanctuary of sanctioned norms bidding himself to do 
what is desirous and forbidding himself all that is 
undesirable and deproved. In this mystique lies the 
excellence of man in, pursuiv of Allah's 'Marafat' in his 
heart all the time. The man reaches the pinnacle of 
glory when he gains the ble< sings and the nearness of 
Allah as soon as he gets totally submerged in this state 
and becomes forgetful of eve -ythlng else. 

(^ipUiV) 'fi'jaji iJdJiji 

Say: 'Allah.' Then leave them to play in 
their vain discussions. (6:91) 

The truth of saying "La Ilah Ha Hlulah" (There is no 
Allah but only He) is also tie same and as to err is 
human, it was ordained. 



0" 



747 



And there is none among you, but he shall 
arrive there; it is a thing definite, and 
decreed by thy Lord. (19 : 71) 

Therefore the purpose of life is to reach the 
'Martaba* the status of tauhid (Oneness of Allah), 
understand it, inculcate it in his being to follow His 
dictates to reach the pedestal of the 'Akhlaqe Alaia' 
(The grandeur of conduct). It would mean a singular 
achievement of transcending from the 'Bashari'at' 
(Being a human being : fallible) to the 'Maqame 
Haqiqat' i.e. the position of verity and the truth 
sublime. 

To strive in the path of Allah is a very difficult 
task. Such 'Riazat' takes a lot, of man. It is painstaking. 
The man requires a competent Tabib' (A physician) 
i.e. a 'Murshade KamiP (An accomplished guide of the 
soul) to treat him of his ailments, to recovery and 
redeeming health. 

The 'Murshad' knows how to go about it. Just 
one dose of medicine is not enough to eradicate all ills 
of man. He supervises his patient right through, in the 
stages of his recovery. The position can be explained 
by the example that when a child comes to his teacher 
to learn 'Ilmo Adab', he does not tell him "study hard 
my child so that you may become the 'Hukoomat' of 
this place," for the child does not know what a 
'Hukmran' or 'Hukoomat' is. But the child can be 
exhorted to become a good student by taking keen 
interest in his studies by telling him that 'if you study 
hard and do well, we will get you a bat and ball to 
play with." The stage of 'Sardari' (Becoming a chief) 



7-18 



comes later. 

Likewise, a 'Murshzid' takes command of his 
pupil, his disciple and makes him a novel person out 
of an-imaginary. If the 'Murshad' finds his 'Murid' 
lacking in certain things hd tells him "to work hard, 
keep on enquiring and make up the deficiencies by 
hard work and sincerity of purpose." His guidance 
gives the 'Murid' self-confidence and respect as he 
progresses. The 'Murid' learns to disdain the 
derogatory things and esteem the estimable. He comes 
to realise that his 'Murshad' is right that there are 
scorpions in sins and . the lizards of Just and 
lascivioUsness swallow the good in man in quick gulps. 
To be a 'Siddiq' is a very asteemed status. These are 
the very first traits that are nullified in a 'Siddiq'. 

HOW TO DIAGNOSE THE DISEASES OF THE 
*NAFS' 

Just like short sightedness is an ailment of the 
eyes, as the man can not see properly, the deafness 
signifies that there is a defect in the ears of the man 
and so on, in the same manner the* sickness of the 
heart i.e. the soul, the 'Nats' becomes evident when it 
has no place in it for Allah and all that is ordained by 
Him. The 'Marafat' of Allah is the food of the soul, as 
meals taken by the man arc nourishment for his body. 
And, if the appetite of a m<in sags or if he stops taking 
food as he has no desire fc r it, it means that the man 
is sick in body. Similarly that soul too is sick which 
does not take its natural food- It is so vital for it. 
Hence Allah has ordained. 



749 



Say, if your fathers, your sons. ... (9 : 24) 

It means that if you prefer your parents, children, wife, 
brothers and sisters viz your family, your 'Mai' (worldly 
assets), trade and palaces to fighting for Allah against 
His foes, then wait for the Allah's command in the 
matter. The 'Qudrat' to this effect means that the man 
has become 'Qadir' competent mentally to perform 
Allah's 'Farmanbardari' i.e. obey His commands. The 
blessings is contained in doing so without 'Jabr' (Per 
force majeure). When the heart becomes mellorised 
and fervent in the love, he makes haste to render 
faithful service to Allah and make sacrifices for Him. 
The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has said: 

-1*1, • ■ i s £ * 1 ' 

"The soothing solace of My eyes is in my 
prayers." 

When a man does not find this thing in his 
heart he should krfbw that it is sick and he should 
become busy in its treatment. He may or may not be 
able to diagnose its disease. Hence, it is advisable for 
him to take stock of things, introspect and try to 
ascertain what is wrong and why? 

(i) He should seek the guardianship of his 
'Murshad'. 

(ii) Or he should have a sincere friend, to pick out 



7 30 

his shortcomings and tell him. A flattering 
person or a prejudiced critic, won't do. Such 
persons whom he may really esteem for his love 
and unmaligned opinion are rather scarce these 
days. Hazrat Daooc Tai's (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
remarks are self eicplanatory in this regard. 
Somebody asked him why he remains aloofish. 
Is it because he has no friend? He heaved a 
sigh and said, "What is the use of sitting in the 
company of such paople who do not tell me 
anything of my faults?" 

(iii) Though his enemies are likely to try and 
exaggerate his shortcomings and try to give the 
dog a bad name and hang him, the third way is 
that he should avail of their criticism, sift the 
evidence and determine his drawbacks by this 
indirect method. Once people asked Hazrat Isa 
Alai Uas Salam (The holy Christ) "Now did you 
come to acquire such high morals? He replied, 
"From no one in paricular but I made it a point 
not to do, what an evil person was doing. 

Remember, that a conceited person remains in 
a fools Paradise in his vain jgotism. Vice versa, a sane 
person keeps an eye on himself, frs living example is, 
that one day Hazrat Umar Farooq (Allah be pleased 
with him) asked Hazrat Hiza (Allah be pleased with 
her), "One day the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) had told you of the tricks in 
trade and the treachery cf 'Munafiqs' (Treacherous 
person : Imposters : Hypo scrites) . Do tell me if you 
can find any of their traits in me?" 



751 



The greatness does not lie in overestimating 
one's self but it is rooted in perpetually trying to find 
faults inone's self and in trying to rectify them, 
forthwith. Surely, if a person does not know what is 
wrong with him, what he is suffering from, how can he 
find its 'Ilaj' (Treatment). Allah the Most Sagacious has 
pin-pointed the mot just. 

(t S>t • : cijii) 

And forbade the soul from lust, the 
Garden shall be the refuge. (79 : 40,41 ) 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) used to remark the people after 
returning from 'Jehad'. "We have reverted back to 
bigger 4 Jehad' from a smaller 'Jehad'." The 'Sahabae 
Kiram" used to ask "Ya Rasoolullah (what is bigger 
Jehad?" He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) used to reply, "Jehad Bin Nafs i.e. Jehad against 
the exhortations of the evil tempting self." 

"We have come back to the bigger 
'Jehad' after the smaller 'Jehad' 

There is an other oft-quoted saying of the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him). 
"Do not fall a prey to evil, temptations of 'Nafse 
Ammora* (The evil 'Nafs') in the fulfillment of your 
ignoble desires against the command of Allah lest you 



75:; 



should be accursed by it, on the Day of Judgement. 
So much so, that different parts of your body may 
hold each other responsible for the heinous acts 
performed, due to you." 

Hazrat Hassan Basri (RahmatuHah Alaih) has 
said that "it is far far supeiior to keep a fiery 'Nafs' 
under proper rein and control than a wildly galloping 
horse." 

Likewise, once Hazrat Sirri Saqti (RahmatuHah ' 
Alaih) remarked to people that "my 'nafs' has been 
desirous of taking wall nuts dipped sooked in honey 
for the last forty years but I have so far succeeded in 
keeping it at bay." 

Similarly, Hazrat Ibrahim Khawas (RahmatuHah 
Alaih) has related that "I us«?d to go to 'Kohe Lakam' 
(Name of a mountainous place). There were many 
pomegranate trees, there. Oie day I ate one of them. 
It was bitter. I threw it away and walked away. 
Suddenly I heard a wail iind saw a person being 
snootered by wasps. I said. 'As Salamo Alikam' to 
him. (Conveyed my greeting! to him). He replied, 'Wa 
Alaikum us Salam' (Greetings to you also), Ibrahim'. I 
was surprised that he had celled me by name. I could 
not help but enquire of him. 'Now do you know me?' 
He replied, "A person who has cognizance of Allah 
can recognise everything." I was still at a loss to 
understand the matter anc remarked, "Under the 
circumstances why don't you pray that the desire for 
the promegrate is removed from your heart?" He 
answered, "You are absolutely right. The pain of the 
sting of the wasps is limited to this world only but the 



753 



agony in the craving for the prorhegranates will have 
to be faced and answered for, in the next world." 

Ponder over the thinking of the elite of the 
'Deen'. To eat 'Anar' (The pomegranate) is 'Mubah' 
(Permitted : Not forbidden) but to the veritable its 
craving is not good. They are careful people. They do 
not want to make their 'Nafs', the heart, slave to the 
desire of any worldly temptation big "or small. It 
tantamounts to 'Haram' for them as they are afraid of 
its accountability on the 'Roze Qiamat' (The Day of 
Judgement). So much so that once Hazrat Umar 
Farooq (Allah be pleased with him) remarked that 4 'I 
am so afraid of 'Haram', that in its fear I withdraw my 
hand from what is ostensibly 'Halal' seventy times a 
day." 

There is more to it than meets the eye i.e. 
when the man starts relishing 'Halal' things, love for 
this world is evoked in his heart. The heart gets stuck 
in it. Then the world becomes a 'Jannat' (The 
Paradise) to him. In consequence, he starts dreading 
the death. The vicious circle of desire restricts him. The 
web of delicious and savourous things is so entiwined 
in his heart that when he bows in prayers before Allah, 
it is without the texture of zeal and fervour to his 
Creator. He finds no 'Lazzat' (Delight) in it. Vice versa, 
the friends of Allah remain so akin to the idea of 
pleasing Allah that they remain broken hearted in the 
pangs of His love and start looking down upon the 
world's attractions, instinctively. Even the 'Mubat* 
delicious of this life become immaterial to them. In 
return, Allah the Beneficient rewards them with the 
most exquisite fruits of His 'Jannat' -and other 



754 



delegable rarities, which thi people of this world can 
not «ven dream of. They sey the rosaries of the praise 
of Allah with doleful, palpitating heart and gain the 
eminent stature of the 'Salih2en' and 'Siddlqs'. 

Taming the 'Nafs' is like taming the eagle. In 
doing so his eyes are blind folded so that he remains 
away from the home, unaware of its confines - at a 
safe distance from its inmates. Then his food is 
gradually increased, so that he may become used to 
his master, till he can fly aloft to greater heights to find 
its designated prey. In the same manner, the soul does 
not find its , quest till the eyes, ears, the nose do not 
give up seeing the unsightly , hearing the cheerless and 
smelling the odour of a fragrant moment. The Divine 
fragrance of the love of Allah is far superior to the 
musk of this world for these venerated people. Then 
engrossment in the quest of the 'Marafat' of Allah is 
unique. 'Goshae Tanhaf (A solitary place) for 
undusturbed worship, becoming remiss of their food 
and enchanting night-vigils become their habit. They 
are awaken when others are fast asleep. It is not easy 
to achieve the grandeur, which they possess. 

The essence of 'Riiizat' (Dedication in Allah's 
reverence and worship) lies in singular toil to this 
effect. 

(i) By acting contrary to what pleases him the most 
in this world. 

(ii) By overcoming those things which have 
overpowered him in life. It .entails many 
hardships. 



755 



In other words If he likes the 'Jaho Hashmat' of 
this world, he should leave it. Such pomp and show 
should be sacrificed for Allah. If he likes the 'mal', the 
worldly riches and assets, he should spend it away in 
the name of Allah. 

Likewise, if there are other occupations and 

attractions which have taken the better of him and 

distract him from the 'Yad' (Remembrance and 
worship) of Allah, he should cast them aside. 

Having done this and got rid of all such 
deterrents in his way, he should get close to the only 
friend, who will stand by him always in this world and 
in the next - the Eternal Friend, in whose friendship he 
will find far more than what he has given up. He will 
get so much of solace and happiness that he will never 
be able to conceive of it. A 'Vahi' was sent to Hazrat 
Daood Alai Uas Salam (Prophet David) by Allah that 
"as I am your friend, you also become My friend." 

Indeed, singularly blessed are those, whom 
Allah the Beneficient likes. This glory has been 
culminated by Allah on His Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him). He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has also summarised 
this truth in the following words. 

"You may get enamoured by anything 

in the world you like. But, remember 

that after all everything will be cast apart 
from you." 



756 



GOOD CONDUCT : AKHLAQE HASSANA' 

The qualities of good conduct and 'Akhlaqe 
. Hassana' have been describee at various places in the 
Holy Qur'an. For example, in these 'Ayats\ 

(T«^ :: O^pjjt) • 

The Believers have suxeeded, who are 
humble in their Prayer. (23 : 1,2) 

Those who repents, those who serve.... 
< (9:112) 

Again, in this 'Ayat'. 
("\r :i>\ijil\) 

The servants of the All merciful, are those 
who walk on the earth modestly... (25 : 63) 

The Holy Prophet (pe ace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that "The purpose of a 
Musulman's (A Muslim's) lif<! is 'Namaz', 'Roza' and 
worship of Allah' whereas that of a 'Munafiq' (A 
treacherous person : A hypocrite : A misehief monger) 
is always to eat, drink and enjoy himself in life, at all 
costs." The habits of these Munafiqeen referred to in 
the Holy Book are evil, to the extent of being 
nefarious. 



757 



Hazrat Hatim Assam (Rahmatullah Alaih) once 
described the veracity of a Muslim and said that "the 
difference between a 'Muslim' and a 'Munafiq' is that 
whereas a 'Muslim' remains constantly occupied in the 
ponderance and propogation {'Fikro Naseehah 
Pazeeri') of the virtuous things of life, in antithesis a 
'Munafiq' has no other aim in this world but to run 
after the worthless and the abominable. Both are* poles 
apart. With the result that the 'Musulman' is afraid of 
nothing but the Almighty Allah whereas a 'Munafiq' is 
scared of everyone except Allah. The true Muslim pins 
his hopes and aspirations on his Lord and Master, 
while a 'Munafiq' depends on all other things except 
Allah to come to his aid and succour. Likewise, -a 
Muslim spends his 'Mai' for the 'Deen' but a 'Munafiq' 
prefers his 'Mai' to the 'Deen'. The Muslim revers his 
Master, pays faithful service to him humbly beseeching 
His Mercy in tears, while a 'Munafiq' perpetuates 
iniquitous crimes and noisy laughs shamelessly. A 
Muslim prefers quietitude but a 'Munafiq' likes hustle 
and bustle and pandemonium. A Muslim grows the 
crops and keeps on praying for a good harvest. On the 
contrary, a 'Munafiq' ploughs the fields perfunctorily 
and hopes for a plentiful harvest." 

The cognescenti veritable saints, the 'Ahlullah' 
have also said that you will generally find such people 
of honour rather coy and retiring, reticent, kindly and 
complacent, an embodiment of truth, disdainful of the 
derogatory and shallow, angels in mercy, dignified, 
,unp?ejudiced, ardent worshippers of Allah and elegent 
in demeanour. Their unconstrained foreheads are 
always 'aglow with the 'Noor' (Celestial blessed 
illumination of Allah) bestowed on there by Allah 



758 



according to their exalted sta us. Their friendship and 
enmity is only for Allah. Sach are these illustrious 
people that they are called 'Villi's* i.e. the friends of the 
Almighty Allah. 

Dear brother, sobriety of temperament is an 
eminent trait. The enemies of the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) tried to menace 
His life to such an extent thai His teeth were martyred 
yet the Embodiment of Rehmat' (Benovolence) 
forgave them and prayed "may Allah have Mercy of 
them. They know Me not." 

It is related that Hazrat Ibrahim Adaham 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) was go ng in a desert when a 
soldier met him and asked him. "Can you tell me if an 
'Abadi' (Where people dwell is nearby?" He pointed 
his finger towards a graveyard. He irksomely retorted. 
"I have asked you for an 'Abadi', not a grave yard." 
Hazrat Ibrahim Adaham answered. "This is the real 
'Aabadi'." He became furicus, hit Hazrat Adaham 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) so mercilessly that he started 
bleeding profusely. He also caught him .and brought 
him to the city. When people of the city saw him in 
this state they condemned the unscrupulous soldier 
and told him. "Don't you know he is Hazrat Ibrahim 
Adham, the venerated Saint All of us dote on him?" 
. Thereupon he alighted from his horse, fell at he feet of 
Hazrat Ibrahim Adaham (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
apologized and said " 'Janab' (Sir), why did you call 
yourself a 'Banda' (Servant)?" He replied, "I told you 
no lie. I am the 'Bandae Rah* (The servant of Allah)." 
He started crying and entreating for his forgiveness. 
Hazrat Ibrahim Adaham said, "I had forgiven you the 



759 



moment broken open my head." People were amazed 
to hear it. They enquired of its reason from Hazrat 
Adaham (Rahmatullah Alaih). He replied, "I did so, as 
I liked to do for him what I wanted for myself. I did 
not wish to get the 'Sawab' for it and 'Burai' i.e. 
punishment for him." 

Somebody invited Hazrat Abu Usman 
(Rahmatullah Alaih). Actually he wanted to test him. 
When Hazrat Usman (Rahmatullah Alaih) reached his 
host's place, he said, "Now the food is finished." He 
departed from there. Thereafter the host ran after him 
and called him back. This process was repeated several 
times. Ultimately, the host addressed Hazrat Usman 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) and respectfully said, "Indeed, the 
nobility of your behaviour is surpassed by your own . 
nobility of behaviour. Infact, I wanted to test you." 
Thereupon Hazrat Usman replied, "It is just nothing. It 
is no better than a dogs behaviour. He comes when 
you call him and goes away when you send him out." 

One day somebody poured a platter full of dust 
on Hazrat Abu Usman's (Rahmatullah Alaih) head 
from his roof. People who saw this were shocked. But, 
they were more amazed wherr they saw him dusting 
his beard and person with his hands and murmuring. 
"Oh Allah Merciful, I am most grateful to you. Actually 
I deserved the blazing flames." 

Hazrat Ali Bin Moosa Raza's (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) colour was dark wheatish. There was a 
'Hammam' (Public bathing place) near his door, in 
'Nishapore'. Out of deference for him, people used to 
vacate it as soon as he used to enter it. Likewise, cne 



760 

day the 'Hammam' was vacated but its owner was not 
on guard. With the result that a 'Ganwar' (An ill bred, 
illiterate person : An uncouth person) entered it. Raza 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) was one of the servants of the 
'Hammam' and asked him ta bring some water. Hazrat 
Raza brought it for him. Then he ordered Hazrat Raza 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) to fetch some bathing clay for 
him. He did so. He kept on obeying his various 
commands. When the owner of the 'Hammam' saw 
the brute, he ran away halter skelter, in fear. 

Hazrat Abdullah (Rahmatullah Alaih) was a 'Vali 
Waqt' (A 'Vali' of his time). He was a tailor by 
profession. An idolator used to have his clothes 
stitched from him and used to give Hazrat Abdullah a 
false coin everytime whi:h he used to accept 
unhesitatingly. However, one day Hazrat Abdullah's 
servant declined to accept a false coin from him in 
remuneration, when Hazrat Abdullah was not present 
in the shop. Hazrat AbdulUih came to the shop and 
told his servant. "Why did you do so with him. He has 
been giving me a false coin I have been accepting it 
from him quietly and unobtrusively all along so that 
no other Muslim is harmed by it?" 

The children used to throw stones at Hazrat 
Owais Qarni (Rahmatullah Alaih) whenever he used to 
come out, on the street. He used to tell the children. 
"Throw small stones at me. If my feet are hurt I may 
not be able to stand for my p rayers." 

One day a person kept on abusing Hazrat 
Ahnaf Bin Qais (Rahmatullah Alaih) while he was 
walking along the road side. Hazrat Qais kept quite 



761 



right through but when he reached near the vicinity of • 
his relatives, he told the man, "I'll wait here till you 
have finished with all the bad names that you want to 
call me. I am afraid that after that my kith and kin may 
get offended and you may be harmed." 

One day, a woman called : Hazrat Malik Dinar 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) and said that "you are a 'Riakar' 
(A hypocrite : An imposter)." He looked at her and 
told her, "The people of Basra seem to have forgotten 
my name. How did you come to recollect it?" 

There is lot to be learnt from these anecdotes of 
our 'Buzurgane Deen'. They were the torch-bearers of 
wisdom for the path finders in the darkness of this 
world. We should take a leaf out of their book, reform 
our lives and adopt 'Akhloqe Hassana'. 

THE BRINGING UP AND NURTURING OF 
•AULAD* (ONE'S CHILDREN) 

A person's children are like a trust to him. It's 
heart is like a unique pearl which, besides a strange 
aura of translucence is pure and nascent. A child is litie 
('Pak Zameen') the unalloyed earth in which whatever 
is grown is harvested. If the seed of virtue is f sown in it, 
virtue will blossom forth from it and his parents and his 
tutors would be rewarded. Vice versa, the ill fate of the % 
deplorable thistles and thorns of the evil would be the 
Isustrating* result. That is why the Almighty Allah has 
drdainea*. 



(1 : (rtyJlt) 



762 

Guard yourselves and your families 
against a Fire. ... (66 : 6) 

The fire of Hell is far severer than the fire of this 
world. If we can not bear the fire in this life how can 
we possibly encounter the conflagration of Hell? It 
necessitates that the dictate of Allah are followed 
obediently by fulfilling our duty. The parens and the 
teachers should take adequale steps to this effect. 

1. By teaching the childten 'Adab*. (Respectfulness 
and good behaviour) . 

2. By imparting education and good manners to 
them. 

3. They should be protected from the evil and the 
bad company. 

4. They should not be made to wear pompous 
dress of the vain and the ostentatious otherwise 
they will become habituated to it. 

5. If the child does not tike his mother's milk, her 
'feeding mother' (The 'Amna') should be a 
'Saliha' (A pious lady! , so that her 'Halal' milk 
may penetrate into th2 veins of the infant with 
resultant piety in blooc . 

6. The child should be so brought up that as soon 
as he learns to speak, the first wort that he 
utters should be 'Allah . 

7. The child's coyness is a good trait. He would 
later feel averse to sha neful deeds and things. 

8. The child should be taught the 'Adaab' (The 



763 



etiquette) of eating, with his growth. 

A. He should be made to have the habit of 
saying 'Bismillah' (By the Name of Allah) 
when he starts eating. 

B. He should be taught to eat with his right 
hand. 

C. He should be told to chew his morsels 
properly. 

D. He should become accustomed to not to 
taking his food hurriedly in quick gulps. 

E. He should be made to learn the good 
manners of not counting the morsels of 
others. • 

F. He should take the morsels of food one 
at a time, not acting like a starving 
python. 

G. The child should be taught to eat neatly 
without spilling things up and sullying his 
clothes. 

H. It would be in the best interests of the 
child to get him to take the bread without 
the curry sometimes. It will make him 
used to contentment in life. 

I. The child should be trained to wear 
simple but neat and clean clothes. The 
avarice for rich, colourful, fancy attire is 
damaging to his later life. The parents 
have to set an example for him. We 
have already dwelt on it. 



764 



9. The neglected children who move about in bad 
company tend to become cheeky, shameless, 
liars and overbearing, besides attaining many 
other bad traits. Se me of them become petty 
thieves. 

10. As soon as the ch id starts going to 'Maktab' 
t (School), his scholarstic career should start with 

the 'Holy Qur'an' (Anecdotes of wisdom) of the 
•Buzurgane Salaf iThe venerated people of 
respect of the older i days), to him. Strict care 
should be taken that love lyrics and amorous 
stories of women aru not told before the child, 
at any stage. Only pious and learned tutors 
should educate the child. A wise teacher always 
encourages his pupilii by word and gesture, also 
by praising him for Ms good attributes, progress 
and good behaviour before his parents. Such a 
pat on the back does; so much to bring out and 
flourish the inherent virtue in the scholar. 

11. At the same time, the child should not be 
scolded on trifles, but a vigilant eye should all 
along be kept on lis major drawbacks and 
simultaneous corrective action should be taken 
on them politely tim sly, without ridiculing him 
before others. 

12. Tact and discretion is equally required in 
forming the conduct of the child as well as in 
reforming him where necessary. The father 
should oversee thinjs but should keep his 
'Azmat' (Greatness) a:; the head of the family in 
mind, whereas the . mother should scare him by 
saying that 'jf you do not give up this bad habit 



765 



etc I will tell your father about it etc'. 

The child should not be made to sleep on soft 
luxurious beds, so that he may grow up to be a 
strong, rough and tough person. Luxurious life 
can make a child become vain and boastful. 

The child should be advised not to take things 
from other children as far as possible so that he 
may not get into the habit of begging. 

The child should also be told not to twiddle the 
nose or spit before others. Nor should he sit 
with his back to others. Also to sit casually 
before his seniors with his palm under his chin is 
not good for the child's breeding. 

The child should also be taught not to gibber. 
Talking too much aimlessly and the habit of 
swearing is undesirable for a child. Nor should 
the child initiate conversation in the company of 
his elders. He should learn to be respectful to 
his elders. It should show in his 'demeanour. 

The child should be taught 'namaz' at the age of 
seven. When he becomes ten, he should be 
dealt with more severely. A child in teens is in a 
delicate stage of life. Traits like petty pilferage, 
giving false statements to cover his faults and 
other minor ills can become major ailments 
afterwards. A little smacking way also not be 
overruled at this stage, to avert a major disaster, 
later on. 

The 'Haqiqat* i.e. the truth of 'Jannato Dozakh' 
i.e. the Paradise and the Hell should also be 
taught to the child vis a vis good deeds and the 



'66 



bad ones at the age 

19. A child's mind is mc re receptive at this juncture. 
Such training will have a lasting effect on him. 
The main thing is that the child's upbringing 
should be undertaken with such care and 
fineness that the ob;ective of his proper briefing 
• and cultivation of character is achieved as 
smoothly, as possible. To be unduly harsh and 
critical is unwise. 

Hazrat Sahal Tastri (Rahmatullah Alaih) has 
narrated that "I remember 1 was three years old. I used 
to see my maternal uncle Hazrat Muhammad Bin 
Sawar (Rahmatullah Alaih) saying his prayers. One 
day he told me, "Won't you like to pray to your 
Creator?" I asked him, "How can I do so?" He said, 
"Before going to sleep you should say in your heart 
Allah is with me. He sees rne, seven times." Later, he 
asked me to say it eleven times. I started doing so and 
a strange mellowness started dwelling in my heart. I 
kept on doing so for several years. Then, one day he 
told me, "If Allah remains v/ith a person and sees him, 
that man does not disobey Allah." When I became 
seven years 'of age I started going to 'Maktab'. When I 
became ten years old I learnt the Holy Qur'an. Till 
twelve I started keeping 'Roza' also. When I became 
thirteen years of age I became stuck on a point and 
requested that I may be sent to 'Basra'. I roamed 
around the place, went to several 'Ullama' but the knot 
was not unravelled. Then somebody suggested that I 
should go and see an 'Abid' (A Holy man : A 
worshipper). I did so anc the issue was resolved, 
forthwith. I remained with him for quite some time. 
After that I came back horns to Tastar', 1 used to buy 



767 



barley worth a dirham and break my fast with it. There 
used to be no curry. I kept on dragging along like this 
for quite some time. Thereafter I decided to go without 
meals. To begin with, I did not eat for five days, then 
for seven days, till I reached the limit of remaining thus 
up to twenty five days. It became my routine till twenty 
years. With the blessings of Allah, I used to pray all 
night during this period. My entire existence changed." 
This 'Hikayat' has been related in the context that the 
seeds of the good sown in the hearts of the children 
initially never go waste. They flourish, and blossom 
forth fruitfully. 

THE DISCIPLE AND 'RIAZAT 

The seeker of Allah and His 'Marafat' should 
traverse on the path of Allah. He is unsuccessful only if 
his Talab' (Pursuit) is not 'Sadiq' (True : Genuine : 
Veritable) or he does not know the true path of Allah 
i.e. he is lacking in its 'Ilm'. That is where the Murshid 
(His spiritual guide) can help him. Surely, who would 
like to have a petty pot of clay, feeble and feckless 
instead of a beautiful vase of gold. That is the 
difference between the attainment of this world and the 
'Akhirat'. 

As such, the best course to pursue is to seek the 
'Raza' (Happiness : Blessing) of Allah and follow in the 
footsteps of His Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him). As regards the requisite 'Ilm' to 
do so, the pity is that with the passage at time the real 
'Ulema' have become scarce, almost extinct. It is a 
great tragedy. This fact is all the more agonising for 
those who are sincerely desirous of treading on the 



768 

path of Allah but there is no dependable guide, no 
leader of worth for them. It results in 'Zu'fe Eiman' 
(The weakness of Faith and reverence of Allah). It 
means loss of 'Deen-o-Dunya*. It is catastrophic. Allah 
the Merciful has conveyed tils factum to us all in clear 
words, in the Holy Book. 

And whoso desires the Hereafter and 
strives for it with necessary effort, and he 
is a Believer, they are the ones whose 
striving shall be thantod. (17 : 19) 

You see, here again Ihe Allah has laid stress on 
making 'Saee' (Dedicated effort). The purpose of this 
discourse is to examine it. Thus, 'Saee' means to go 
on a path. It implies four distinct things. The 
impediments of 'Mal\ 'Jan , Taqleed and Ma'siyat. 
'Hal', *Jan\ Taqleed and Ma'siyet. 

The first condition is :hat the man - the seeker 
of the truth should try and r amove the 'Hijab' (A veil) 
between him and his Allah so that he may not be 
amongst those people al>out whom Allah has 
ordained, in the 'Holy Qur'an'. 

And We have put a barrier before them.... 

(36 : 9) 

Those four veils of the *MaP (The worldly 



769 



assets), 'Jan' (Position of power : Pomp and show), 
'Taqleed' (Following) and 'Ma'siat' i.e. depravity are big 
impediments in the path of man. 

A. So, it is advisable not to keep more 'Mai' with 
him than is actually required. The man should 
expend the rest in the 'Rah' i.e. the way of 
Allah. And if a man gives away all that he 
possesses, in the name of Allah and strives in 
the cause of Allah, he becomes absolved of all 
'Hirs' (Greed), becomes noble and is able to 
travel on the path to Allah far more 
conveniently. 

B. 'Jaho Hashmat' is likewise, also a great 
deterrent. It makes the man intoxicated with 
power and worldly ostentation. The fanfair and 
the plaudits of the people have a blinding effect 
on him. He loses his way and becomes 
misguided. How can that man reach his goal, 
who is misdirected and is going on the wrong 
course? Such a misrouted person can never 
reach Allah, as, instead of having his direction 
and face towards Him, he treads on the wrong 
and reverse path, with his back to the Almighty, 
due to his enchantment of the worldly glamour 
instead of the splendour of the 'Akhirat' and 
Allah. 

C. Similarly, 'Taqleed' - blind following also 
becomes a 'Hijab', a veil between him and his 
Allah when he vainly comes to have faith in the 
wrong beliefs. His heart gets so set with these 
thoughts that it does not accept any other code 
of conduct. He becomes one-track minded and 



170 



does not listen to reason. The only cure, the 
only way out for him, out of this dilemma is to 
fathom the verity ol 'La Ilaha Illullah' (There is 
no Allah but Allah) and get to believe in it with 
his heart and soul. After that comes the stage of 
'Rlazat' i.e. striving n the 'Rah' (path) of Allah, 
as ordained by Him in the above noted verse of' 
the 'Holy Qur'an'. Allah, is most Merciful. In the 
same 'Ayat', He has promised to reward such a 
seeker of the truth. Oner, the veil is lifted Allah 
makes his hear: translucent with His 
illumination, the 'Noor\ No sooner he sees the 
Tajalli' (Holy illumination of Allah's blessing) of 
Allah than unique things of virtue start getting, 
intimated to him by the man's Creator, by 
'Kashf* (Allah's Merciful pre-ordination of things 
to come). In antithesis the 'Luqmae Harem' 
(The forbidden illegitimate, immoral livelihood) 
mars and darkens his soul. The choice is his, 
which way to go! 

In a way the 'Ma'slat' (Depravity : Evil) is the 
greatest 'Hijab' between this man and his Creator. It is 
just the opposite of what Allah dictates. He becomes 
the foe of Allah and the friend of *lblees\ the arch 
enemy of Allah. Such a man who has the audacity of 
countermanding his Crealor and befriending Allah's 
foes, is the most appaling and abominable His 
creatures. There is peaos, Paradise and purity in 
Allah's friendship and curse of Allah and His angels on 
the friend of the Satan. Therefore, it is in the best 
interest of man to fall on the 'Shari'at' and then get 
engrossed in the pursuit of Allah's 'Marafat'. The 
cognizance of the 'Deen' and 'Shari'ah' is the first 



771 



thing. Obviously a person who does not know Arabic, 
to begin with, will not be able to delve into the 
Tafseere Qur'an' (The details and discourse of the 
Holy Book). 

Having cleansed himself in this manner, the 
man becomes fit to say his prayers - his 'Namaz'. Now 
he needs an Imam' (A leader of prayers) . In a way, 
he is his 'Murshad' (The spiritual teacher - leader). He 
should say his prayers under his leadership. He should 
carefully listen to the verses fo the 'Holy Qur'an' that 
he recites in his prayers and otherwise and model his 
life according to the dictates of Allah. He should also 
befriend the pious and the learned in the mosque and 
gather knowledgf and words of wisdom from them. 
The main thing is to find out the divergent ways of the 
wicked whose leader is the Satan and this path of 
Allah followed by the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him). He should be diligent 
and wary of the 'Munafiqs' who try to muddle things 
up and mislead the faithful. Indeed, the devil has 
many appealing methods of misleading people. He 
does so in thousands of crafty ways but if the man - 
the seeker of truth is staunch and sincere his 'Jazbae 
Eiman' (The verity of Faith in Alalh) will stand him in 
goodstead and save him from falling into the clutches 
of the Satan. 

* 

The truth is that he 'Ibices* has many devious 
ways, there is only one path to be pursued viz that of 
Allah. If he wants to proceed on this path and is also 
lucky to get a 'Rehbare Kamil' (An accomplished 
leader), he is very lucky indeed. The Murid (The 
disciple) should entrust himself to his 'Murshad' (The 



772 

spritual teacher) for the enlightenment of the Akhirat. 
If he finds something ostensibly wanting at any stage, 
he should not vascilate or demur and think that my 
ultimate betterment lies in falih in him. As the poet has 
said: 

"If your 'Murshad' asks you to do so, do not hesitate 
to dip your prayer mat in wine and dye it in for, the 
'Salik' (The seeker of truth, ii love) multicolour knows 
that there are many novelties of a unique nature in this 
path." 

Therefore, if a 'Mu:1d' sometimes, observes 
something intriguing in his 'Murshad', he should think 
twice before looking askar ce at (him. He should 
remember the episode of Hazrat Khizar Alai Uas 
Salam. Then he \yill learn that, at times Allah reveals 
such secrets and things to his illustrious people, which 
a 'Murid' can never fathom ir his life. 

It is narrated that the famous Hakim Jalinoos 
put an effectual or healing ointment on the paining 
right hand finger of a patient several times but without 
any effect. The veritable sage then applied the 
ointment on the tip of his riciht shoulder and the pain 
subsided straightaway. Peope were surprised. It was 
only when he explained to them that the muscles in his 
nerve centre were affected h >nce he had done so that 
people understood the myste ry as to why the medicine 
was applied to his shoulder jvhile the pain was in the 
finger. It shows that there Is a 'Hikmat' (Sagacity : 
Ingenious verity) in everything. Hence, if the 'Murshad' 
is 'Sahibe Kamal' (Par. excellence) a doubting finger 
should not be raised at him. Make sure first, whether, 



773 



what you have chosen is a stone or a gold nugget. If it 
is gold, rest assured that it is not stone. Have no 
misgivings and fears. Things will unfold before you 
eventually. The 'Murid' should not bring any Tasarru 
(Doubts and misgivings) in his 'Batin' i.e. in his soul. 

Shaikh Abul Qasim Gurgani (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) was known for his interpretation of dreams. He 
was a 'Vali KamiF (A great 'Vali' : A Great Saint), to 
boot. Once, Khawja Boo Alai Farmadi (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) was unhappy with him. He himself noticed that 
Hazrat G&rgani (Rahmatullah Alaih) had not spoken to 
him for a month. When Hazrat Imam Ghazali 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) tried to placate him, he said, 
"You know that I explained something to you in the 
dream. Instead of accepting to it, as such, you asked 
me "Why", in your dream. Clearly you were not 
happy with it. Now I am not happy with you." There 
is a lasting lesson in it for all of us. A 'Murshad Kamil' 
is a 'Murshad Kamil'. He reaches this stage after great 
'Riazat', with the blessings of Allah. The 'Murid' should 
have full faith in him. Only then will he be able to 
become a good. pupil. In turn the 'Murshad' will take 
him in his 'Hisar' (Protective wall : Guarding 
circumference) whereby he will be protected against all 
hazards with the Mercy of Allah. 

This 'Hisar' ;is not an ordinary protective wall. It 
has four strong walls like a fort or a castle i.e. 'Khalwat' 
(Privacy), 'Khamoshi' (Silence and Solitude) 'Gursangi' 
(overcoming want and hunger) and 'Bikhawabi' 
(Sleepness : Night vigils in worship of Allah) are its 
outer structures of strength. The Gursangi blocks the 
path of the devil. The 'Khamoshi'; i.e. quietitude 



774 



cleanses the dust accumulates on the body. Privacy In 
'Khalwat' eliminates the derog atory and the darkness of 
the multitude of 'Dunya'. It also safeguards the eyes 
against seeing the unsightly and unsavoury. The 'Be 
Khawabi viz the habit of night vigils in worship 
envelopes all of them into its superlative culmination in 
the reverence of Allah. 

One day Hazrat Sahl Iastri (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
was explaining it to his discijules and summed it up by 
saying that "the eminent status achieved by the 'Abdal' 
(A 'vali' of a high status, in is categorisation^ls due to 
these virtuous instruments of excellence. When the 
mist of worldly dust is rerroved, the path becomes 
vividly clear, the 'Selik* starts noticing and removing 
the impediments in his path. The 'Solitore' (A diamond 
or gem set by itself) of Allah's 'Marfat' constant 
cleaning and polishing of it, elevating his status more 
and more, till he himself becomes a 'Vali Kamil', - an 
'Abdal'." 

The 'Murshad' considers himself in loco parentis 
to his 'Murid'. He watches his disciple saying 'Allah 
Allah* with his heart in sollt ide, the tongue silent, till 
the heart beats and it becomes absolutely akin to each 
other and the voluntary effort to intone the 'Kalima', 
'Allah* in His 'Yafl' becomes an involuntary automatic 
process. Then comes the stoge that this Kalimae Pak' 
of Allah becomes -Jari' (Personally flowing) from his 
heart. It's blessings overtake his being. Allah and Allah 
alone rules, overall else in him. The word 'Allah' gets 
engrained in his heart. Fits soul is enriched. He 
becomes blessing. and piety personified. His horizon 
changes. He becomes pre eminent, to personify it, 



775 



Hazrat Shibli (Rahmatullah Alaih) told one of his 
disciples, one day that "I want you to come to me 
regularly for a week, without fear of anything in your 
heart except that of Allah, the Omnipotent. If you feel 
that you can't do so, you should not come her* any 
more. It would be of no use." 

There is no limit to excellence. When the heart 
is purified of the worldly 'Wasawis' (Fears and 
anxieties) the seed of 'Zikre Ilahi' (The remembrance 
and the reverence of Allah) should be sown in its fertile 
field. This is the right time to do so. The harvest would 
be rich and plentiful. The heart has been so made by 
Allah that it is able to nourish and nurture His love. 
This is its singular characteristic and the most elegant of 
all. If the land be so extraordinarily fertile and the seed 
grown so splendid and the Grace of Allah be there, 
the harvest is likely to be equally excellent, as ordained 
by Allah. 

Any * who desires the tillage of the 
Hereafter, we shall give him increase in his 
tiUage (42 : 20) 

Unto each up to his reach. Subsequently 
different 'Murids' find themselves in different situations. 
It is a unique undertaking. Some 'Murids' star* 
vacillating under the impact of this 'Kalima' in a state of 
hope and fear. Some overcome it. Others start seeing 
beautiful souls and facsimiles of angels, in their dreams 
or with their naked eye in a blessed trance. In short, it 



7'6 

Is a transcendence of the soul to strange realms and 
realities. It is a very lengthy and difficult subject. The 
more we delve in it the more our thirst for it will 
increase, but the matter won't end. 

Summum bonum, It is better to become a 
fortunate participant in the proceedings, go from step 
to step, advance from sage to stage, see what 
transpires and eagerly awaits more to come. 'Hijab* 
after 'Hijab* would be ummlled until the 'Iim' would 
stand rooted to the spot wonder stuck and 'Eiman* 
Twakkal Billah' and 'Mar'fnt Ilahl' would supervene! 
Some 'Ulema' who confine themselves to the obvious 
and the ostensible tend to differ with it, but there is a 
world of difference between a fact and easily done 
thing. 

HOW TO FORESTALL SENSUAL URGES; 
STOMACH AND ITS RAVENOUS DESIRES 

, If we look at it squarely, the stomach is like the 
pond of the body. Veins are its tributaries. Actually, a 
man's stomach is the source of all sexual urges. When 
we come to brass tacks we realise that, in fact, 
'Shahwat' (Sexual Mania :S«$xual Desire) is the most 
predominant trait in man which leads him astray. 
Perhaps Adam had to leave F'aradise on account of it. 

Nitty gritty, this lust is the strongest of all lusts 
and fiery cravings. As soon as a man's belly is filled 
with food this urge starts meiadng him. Then, either 
he performs 'Nikah' (i.e. enters Into wedlock) or goes 
haywires. The man requires *Mal* (The worldly assets) 
to fulfil the 'Shahwat' i.e. this yearning or lust of his 



777 



stomach and the 'Sharmgah, (Sexual organs). In turn, 
he requires a certain standing or status to be able to 
achieve it. With the result that his self starts striving for 
it and in doing so he is apt to be inclined to do things 
which he should not do and even antagonists people 
and things. Tragically, he upsets the apple cart, 
sometimes. Jealousy, vindictiveness and arrogance 
emerges imperceptibly, in him. He loses the balance 
and goes overboard. Hence, the sages have advocated 
leaving the belly to itself i.e. become used to remaining 
hungry. There is 'Naiki' (Goodness) in suppressing it. 

THE VERITY OF HUNGER 

Ravenoysness is deplorable. The Holy Prophet 
of Allah (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has described it as being equivalent to 'Jehad' against 
the 'Kuffar'. Allah likes the killing of its yearning, 
specially of delicio.us food for the lust of appetite. A 
glutton can not fathom the far reaches of the soul, in 
its lofty light to the skies above. 

Someone asked the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) about the traits of an 
esteemed person. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) replied, "A person 
who eats less, laughs less and is finels and sedately 
dressed (Sedately like the 'Satar' of a woman). 

The following other sayings of the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) are also 
worth-remembering. 

" Tafukkur' (Ponderance over the Truth) is half 



778 



of worship but eating less to kill the lust of the 'Nafs' is 
equivalent to full fledged worship. Voraciousness and 
verity of Allah do not go together. 

"He, who is addicted to Selfish overeating and 
indolent oversleeping is an enemy of Allah." 

"Don't kill your soul by overeating. A field 
flooded with water is devastated." 

"Over filling the stomach is a bad habit, a few 
morsels of food are enough. At the maximum there 
should be one third of food in it, one third of water 
and one third of space to treathe in." 

"The Satan courses through the veins of a man, 
as blood does in his arteric s. Block his free passage by 
remaining hungry, as far as possible." 

Hazrat 'A'isha Sidciqa (Allah be pleased with 
her) has quoted that one day the Rasoolullah 
remarked to me. "Keep on knocking at the door of 
•Jannat' (Paradise). I enquired, "How can one do it?" 
He (peace and blessing; of Allah be upon him) 
answered, "By going without food." 

Hazrat 'A'isha Sidciqa (Allah be pleased with 
her) has also described hew sparingly. He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) used to eat. He (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon, him) used to go without 
food often: She expressed how pained she used to feel 
seeing Rasoolullah do so. She said, "One day I could 
not help it" and said, "I v/ould like to give my life for 
you (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) What 



779 

is the harm if you eat just that much whereby you may 
not have the feeling of hunger left in you?" The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
replied, " 'A'isha! Do you want me not to do what my 
brother Prophets of Allah before me used to do and 
Allah liked them so much? Would you like to see that 
my share and status in the 'Akhirat' is reduced?" 

One day Hazrat Fatima (Allah be pleased with 
her) baked a loaf of bread and came to the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) asked 
her, "What is it?" She said, "I have prepared it. How 
could I eat it without you?"" He replied to her 
affectionately. "These are the first morsels of food tat 
your 'Abba' (Father) is going to have after three days." 

Likewise, Hazrat Isa Alai Uas Salam (The Holy 
Christ) used to say, "Remain contented in hunger and 
meagre attire so that Allah may bless you." 

Hazrat Abu Sulaiman Durrani (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) used to say, "Eating even a morsel less in 
dinner in prepration for the midnightly prayers is quite 
as meritorious, as saying these prayers." 

Hazart Fazeel (Rahmatullah Alaih) addressed his 
heart one day and said, "Why are you afraid of 
hunger? Do you know your meagrely status when 
Allah the Merciful liked to keep the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) and His 
companions to remain hungry for days?" 

One day Hazrat kahmash (Rahmatullah Alaih) 



'80 

humbly said to Aljah, "Oh Allah the merciful! I am 
most grateful to you. I remain hungry and with the 
barest of clothes but in your sublime Beneficience you 
allow me to bow down in s olicitous prayers before You 
at night. How did a man like me become so fortunate 
when I know that You allow this to Your illustrious 
people only?" 

Hazrat Malik Dinar (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
remarked once, "A person who keeps just enough 
food grains to manage to live by, irrespective of the 
world, will find great sola«;." 

Hazrat Muhammad Bin Abdul Wasih 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) used to say that "One should 
learn the virtue of contentment from that man who 
remains hungry day and right and does not complain 
about it to Allah." 

Hazrat Sahl Tastri (Rahmatullah Alaih) used to 
tell the people that "there is nothing more veritable in 
this wold than to remain hungry here and there is 
nothing more perilous for the 'Akhirat' than to be over- 
fed." 

Hazrat Abdullah Bin Zaid (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
has said that "Allah has never made any person his 
friend except for hunger. Those who can walk on 
water are so gifted only because of their trait of 
'Bhook' (Hunger). Nor did any one travel the earths 
great span except due to the 'Qudrat' of hunger." It is 
in the 'Hadith' that Haaat Moosa Alai Uas Salam 
(Prophet Moses) did not ta-te over a morsel of food for 
forty days after he spoke tc Allah the Merciful! 



781 



THE ADVANTAGES OF REMAINING HUNGRY 
AND DISADVANTAGES OF A FULL STOMACH 

The virtue of remaining hungry does not lie in 
its pangs, as the efficacy of the medicine lies in taking 
the bitter medicine for recovery. Nevertheless it has ten 
advantages. 

(i) It's first advantage is that it cleans and sparkles 
the heart. Vice versa a full stomach makes the 
man dreary and dull. It makes his mind 
feverish. This febrility demotes his intellect. He 
is apt to become scatter-brained. The 'Holy 
Prophet's sayings on the subject are conclusive 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) . 

"Don't hatve a hearty meal. It kills the 'Marafat' 
of Allah." 



"Keep your hear alive by eating less. It cleans 
and purifies it and the heart becomes your 
'Rafiq' (The friend)." 

"Keep on knocking at the door of 
Paradise with hunger." 

Hazrat Shibli (Rahmatullah Alaih) remarked 
once that "There is not a day when i have not 
gone through the pangs of hunger for Allah and 
every time, he has blessed me with fresh 
'Hikmat' (Sagacity and wisdom) . 



"'82 



(ii) The second advantage is that hunger makes the 
heart tender, feeling and rueful. It inclines the 
man to worship Allah more devotedly. Worship 
of Allah with a full stomach has no zeal or 
fervour. The word tend to remain stuck on the 
tips of the tongue. 

(iii) The thrid advantage of hunger is that in it the 
man remains week and humble whereas a 
person with a full stomach a glutton is apt to 
become overbearinj and haughty. The former 
feels the want and remembers Allah, while the 
later becomes forgetful of his 'Raaziq' (The 
Provider of livelihood : The Allah). When the 
keys of the treasures of the entire world were 
offered to the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah bn upon him) he said, "Rather 
than have them I v/ould prefer the hunger of a 
day for my piety or the 'Sairi' (Having enough 
food to one's satisfaction) of a day to be grateful 
to Him with my he<irt and soul." 

A man with a full stomach forgets the hungry 
and the poor. As such, he loses the singularly 
blessed opportunity of being kind to them. He 
forgets the 'Azaabe A'khirat' (The Chastisement 
of sins on the Day of judgement). When the 
man becomes remiss of the 'Akhirat' , it means 
that he has lost the fear of Allah. Then the Day 
of Judgement becomes the Doomsday for him. 
One door of the many doors of 'jannat' is that 
of the fear of Allah and 'Shafqat' (Kindness) to 
His 'Bandas' ; (Servants). (Prophet josph) Hazrat 
Yousuf Alai Uas Salam (Peace of Allah be upon 



783 



him) had the keys of the kingdom with him. 
One day people asked why he had the habit of 
going without meals most of the time, yet? He 
replied, "The day I get used to having hearty 
meals I will forget the 'Fuqara' (The poor : The 
needy ; The destitute)." 

The fourth and the foremost salient feature of 
the hunger is that it helps the man in 
overpowering his evil 'Nafs\ just as an 
uncontrollable wild animal is tamed by keeping 
him hungry for a while, the fiery 'Nafs' of man 
is also controlled by going without food. Hunger 
is the strongest deterrent to 'Shahwat' (Strong 
sexual urge) which is like a wild animal. If 
'Shahwat' is controlled, the ferocious animal in 
man is tamed. Hazrat Zunnoon Misri 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) used to tell his disciples, 
"mind you. Man is always tempted to commit 
'Gunah' (Sin) after a full stomach." 

Hazart 'A'isha Siddiqa (Allah be pleased with 
her) has quoted the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) that 'the first 
'BidaY that the man committed is that of 
'Shikam Sairy' (Full stomach : Gluttony). After 
this his 'Nafs' becomes a rebel." This insurgency 
of 'Nafs' makes the man sink to many an act of 
meanness and depravity. Obscenity of tongue 
and turpitude become his armours of evil. 
Hunger is an invaluable gem in the invaluable 
treasures of Allah. He bestows this unique gift 
to only His friends or to those whom He wants 
to make His friend. A sage of the olden times 



734 



once told his listeners that "if a man has the 
contentment to take half of his normal meals for 
a year and eats only 'Rookhi Roti' (Dry 
bread : Meal witiout curry or its 
accompaniments) he will never be harassed by 
the sensual thoughts or beautiful women." 

The fifth obvious advantage is that a person 
who eats less, sleeps less. And the man who 
remains awake remains aware of his Allah, 
specially in his ni;jht vigils in the worship 
supreme. Vice versa an overfed glutton snoring 
his life away in the stupour of sleep is like a 
dying man breathing his last Seventy 'Siddiqs' 
are agreed on the fa:t that: 

A. Overeating decreases the age of man as he 
squanders mosi of it in sleep or idle 
pursuits. 

B. Overeating dete s the man from saying his 
prayers, specially his Tahajjud' (midnightly 
prayers). Sleep overtakes man. He becomes 
a lotus eater. 

C. Overeating makes man grow fat with its 
inherent dangers . 

D. There is danger of night emissions of man 
due to gluttony. 

The sixth advantage of eating less is inherent in 
many things which c ccur in consequence viz. 

A. The man gets scbered down 

B. He is less apt to go to the toilet 

C. His needs reduce correspondingly. He loses 



785 



less time in idle pursuits. 

Hazrat Sirri Saqti (Rahmatullah Alaih) has 
narrated that one day I saw Hazrat AH Jurjanl 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) eating "Sattoo" (Grain 
husk). I asked him, "Why did you not take a 
meal?" He replied, "I have not taken bread for 
the last seventy years. There is a lot of 
difference in gulping the 'Sattoo' in and in 
chewing the morsels of food. It is not proper to 
waste time in it and become negligent of Allah. 
Moreover, it makes the keeping of 'Roza' which 
Allah likes a lot, easy for me." 

Hazrat Abu Saeed Durrani (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
has said that six things occur in man if his belly 
is full. 

(1) The man loses the 'Lazzat' (The bliss) of 
Ibadat (worship and prayer) . 

(2) His memory gets impaired. 

(3) The man becomes negligent and carefree of 
the sufferings of others. 

(4) Lust and libido overcomes the man. 

(5) Prayers and faithful service to Allah become 
burdensome to him. 

(6) While others head for the mosques, such a 
person keeps on visiting the lavatory off and 
on. 

A man who is not a glutton and eats less 
remains healthy. It guards him against being ill, 
going to the Tabib' (A' physician) spending time 



786 

and money in conse quence and loving to eat 
, u^ayou^.roedjc^nfs. ^Jspsafd ;: that \whereas a 

""^^juriqutto' h^. It is in ' the 4 Had«h'. : "Keep 

"'".^;R^p* '(j^ep ; J'ij^an^maJ^ 

(Vill) : ^e n ifti#'^ak of eating less is that tt 
10 auforrfetieal$ W# fesf e^ndtture. J\nd the 
h less a man 1 reo^ir^' ^.^he' better ft' is ter him. 

Money is the root >C all evil. It creates greed 
a; arid '-iorgetfulnessf A sage once said, "I fulfill 
; ' ;/ mosT of W'tt by not going in for those 
things which pester trie (My 'NafsT I prefer to 
take 'Oars' (A loan); from my .stomach and 

\^^\r^:^^m c ,Qarz ' - from 

somebody." 

' "Leave it, and the price, of . it will 
automatically fall;" ^ 

People used to sc e Hazrat Ibrahim Addham 
enquiring about the price of things, sometimes. They 
used to say it is very expensive. He used to reply. 
"Give it up. It will become cheap automatically." 
tHE MANNERS OF A 'MURID' IN EATING LESS 

.The 'Murid' should keep three things in mind 
while eating 'Mal^ei-Hatel'; ? r 

(i) The first thing is 1hat he should eat less and 
keep on reducing i1 gradually. For instance if he 
- otormallys takes a;3to«U.e.^ loaf of bread per 

i .•,,4ay^;:b«i«hoUldi*art feW «9 a morsel of ft 
less each day till h<s can do away with eating in 



787 

a month. It wiU bat be a strain on him. 

A, It's first stage pertains to the 'Siddiqs' i.e. to 
be contented with the barest minimum. 
Hazrat Sahal Tastri (Rahmatullah Alaih) is 
stated to have adopted this method. 
According to him worship and prayers 
('Ibadat') depends on three things viz life 
(Zindagf) ' Aqir,(The wit) and 'Quvvat' 
(Strength). He was of the opinion 1hat food 
should not be taken unless there is a danger 
that the man will not be able to say his 
prayers due to weakness and deblity. 
Likewise, when the danger of loss of 
application i.e. the 'Aqil' occurs food should 
be taken but just enough to go by. He 
explained that on the same principle his 
total expense per annum in only three 
dirhams i.e. one 'Dam' (Dirham : Persian 
small coin) worth of rice, one 'Dams' honey 
and one Dam worth 'Roghan' (olive oil). 
He said, "I make three hundred and sixty 
cakes of this contraption and break my fast 
('Roza') by taking one of these at the time 
of 'Iftari' (Breaking the fast)." It said that 
some recluses don't spend even more than 
a 'Dam' on their food per year. So sparing 
they are in their food and potations. 

B. The second stage consists of eating half a 
'Mud' of food grain. This will help him by 
eating about one third of solid food to fill 
his stomach as stated in the 'Hadith'. 
Accordingly one 'Roti' (Loaf of br.ead) 



788 

should comprise a jout ten morsels. 

"Leave a space one ihird for food, one 
third for drink ami one third for 
remembrance (of Allah)." 

It is reported that Hazrat Umar (Allah be 
pleased with him) used to eat about seven 
' to nine morsels of food and that is all. 

C. The third stage is that the man should rely 
on one 'Mud' only. This should suffice the 
man to fill about half of his stomach with 
solid food, in norrial course. 

D. The fourth stag<$ that full 'Mun' (One 
maund) should be used: This will most 
likely mean partaking of food more than a 
'Mud'. It may tantamount to 'Asraaf 
(Extravagance : Overdoing beyond means 
or beyond what i:i reasonable). It is written 
in the Holy Boo* not to be extravagant, 
exceeding the limits and wasteful. 

Eat and drink, but do not waste; He does 
not love the wasteful. (7 : 31) 

All this is of course, in general principle. The 
main thing is to withdraw the hand in time, far 
before the devil of lust in man is satisfied. The 
'Satan' i.e. "the cuny to go with the bread 
should be avoided as far as possible. 



789 

There used to be a 'Jamaat' of people who 
used to take not more than a . 'Saa'a' (About 
four 'Muds') of food in a week. For them, the 
quantity of the dates used to be not more than 
one and a half 'Saa'a' in a week, including the 
date seeds. 

Hazrat Abu Zar Ghiffari (Allah be pleased with 
him) used to take only one 'Saa'a' worth of 
food per week. He was so abstemious, he 
swore his resolve one day and said that "I 
intend to abide by it all my life." He used to 
rebuke people and say, "You have gone back 
on your commitments. You have increased 
your intake of food that you had during the 
times of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessing 
of Allah be upon him) and you have also 
started changing your dress twice a day. This is 
not according to the order of the 'Nabi karim' 
that 'a man should die in the extreme state of 
piety attained by him'." Those, were the days 
when the total intake of two people used to be 
not more than one 'Mud' of 'Khajoor* dates 
including their seeds. 

Once Hazrat Sahal Tastri (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
said that "even if the entire world turns into a 
flood of blood, with the blessings of Allah, even 
then my food would be meagre and 'Halal'. 

The second care is concerned with the time of 
eating. 

A. The first big stage in it is that there should 



790 



be a gap of at least" three days in eating. 

B. In the second stage of the 'AMuHah' (The 
man of Allah)) who never used to have 
anything for ten (Jays at a strength. 

C. Then, there were some of the venerated 
amongst, the fT^eensV (^l|owers of the 
first rung) who used to abstain from food 
even for forty days* at a time. Hazrat Abu 
bakr Siddiq (Allah be pleases with him) 
used to remain without fopd for six days 
continuously wife; Hazrat JilfW" Soori 

V (May Allah be pleased with him) , used to 
stay away from his meagre meals for three 
days continuously.;! s c 

The 'Ahluilah' (The esteemed friends =of Allah) 
say that a person who is in the n habit of 
abstaining from fooc lojr forty days at d stretch is 
always awarded fromj the VMame^alakoot' 
(The ceiestial angelic f ealm of lofty ^status) by 
Allah the Beneficient. • ^ 

A 'Soofi' entered into a 'Munazara' (A religious 
debate) > with , WRahabJc(A monk). The 'Soofi' 
asked the Rahab '*hy don't yoi» acknowledge 
and acclaim the Holy Prpphet (peace and 
blessings of Allah bf. upon him)?" The monk 
replied, "Because ihe Holy Christ (Prophet Isa 
Alai Uas Salam) kept a fast and wen without 
food for forty days; at a stretch. Why did your 
prophet not do it? ' The Soofi replied, "1 am a 
humble person from His 'Ummaf (Followers in 



791 

Vc'r;" 

Faith) . If I go without food for forty days would 

you ^eoft^W J ^^^ c WtF Not believing 
^imrWRlha^^ 

not eat lot 1 ^ 5 diays^ did ^f 'Mdk 5 any the 
» wojrse- ^or.^^ndjwHed.the 'Rahab'. "It is enough 
for y^u <^r' not^r^lrtifl kept quiet. After that 
the Sopfi continued his fast for another ten 
days. Then the monk asked him to .stop and 
agreed with him. Such a status can 'only be 
obtained by 'Eiman'. 

Coming 4own the line, the verity , of second 
rung lies in eating, after two to three days; The 
third stage of a comparatively lower status is of 
those who eat only, once a day. They don't 
commit the 'Asraf of eating more thai\ that. 
The Holy Prophet, has confirmed this and said 
that "Eating more than once in a day borders 
<on 'Asraf {Exceeding the.ver*tabl« limit)." Once 
. meal in a day keeps the man in good trim. He 
is able to perform his Tahajjid' prayers with 
more ease. 

The th,ird 'Ihtiyat' i.e. the, care is concerned 
more with the variety of the 'Jins', ,(The food 
grain) chosen. Barley with , its husk intact is 
ordinary cereal while the sifted barley is 
moderate in quality. Their accompaniment can 
be the meat and sweets, as dessert. Vinegar 
and other saltish things and other condiments 
are without much impact. Nevertheless, the true 
verity in abstinence from the other auxiliaries tc 
crush the lust of the gluttony and gourmandism 
in the insurgent 'Nafs'. The more the desirous 



7<>2 

nafs is confined in the dungeon by abstinence, 
the happier it will fe«il after its realease from the 
cell after death. It is n the 'Hadith'. 

'The worst people :n my 'Ummah' are 
those who take the wheat flour without its 
husk." 

It is clarified that ioing so is not 'Haram'. 
Actually, the stress is on the levity of going in for the 
refined and toothsome thlnjs, as per another Hadithe 
Mubarak to the effect that 'The lustful of My Ummah 
whose bellies remain stuffed with delicious food and 
whose bodies remain silk-robed must beware of their 
'Anjam' (Result : Consequences : Repercussions)." 

Likewise Hazrat Moojia Alai Uas Salam (Prophet 
Moses) was warned by Allah. "In form your people to 
be aware of their death and cease wearing glamorous 
clothes.They would go to hell for their ostentation." 

Hazrat Wahhab Bin Munabba (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) heard two angels speaking to each other. One 
of them said, "Such and such Jew is sorely in need of 
a fish of a delicious kind. I am going down to involve 
him into the snares of the fishing tackle." The other 
said, "I am also going down to save an 'Abld' (An 
'ardent, worshipful person) irom the clutches of some 
people who have brought a utensil full of 'ghee' to 
tempt him. I am gong to spill it." 

One day, people offered a bowl of honey and 



793 



water to Hazrat Umar Farooq (Allah be pleased with 
him). He declined to accept it and said, "Sorry, I will 
not be able to account for it." 

Hazrat Anba Al Ghulam (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
used to take yeast dried by exposure to sun and used 
to drink warm water to forestall its 'Lazzat' (Joy) . 

One day a favourite disciple of Hazrat Malik Bin 
Dinar (Rahmatullah Alaih) offered a few pieces of fresh 
dates to him. Hazrat Malik Dinar affectionately declined 
to accept it and told him. "I have not taken anything 
for the last forty years. During this period I Have 
occasionally felt a desire to take some milk but I have 
curbed it all along." 

It has been narrated by Hazrat Ahmad Bin 
Alhawari (Rahmatullah Alaih) that "one day my 
'Shaikh* (Spiritual leader : 'Murshad') expressed the 
desire to have a warm loaf of bread with some salt. I 
ran home and brought it for him. Thereupon my 
'Murshad' Hazrat Abu Sulaiman Durrani Put down the 
first morsel from his hand started weeping - addressed 
the Almighty and said, "Oh Allah! In your sublime 
mercy you have fulfilled my desire. It verges on my 
weakness for it. I am sorry for its lust. Forgive me." 

Hazrat Hammad Bin Anifa (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
has related that one day, when I reached the door of 
Hazrat Daood Tai (Rahmatullah Alaih) I heard him 
saying "One day you asked for carrots. These were 
provided to you. Now, you are asking for dates. Mind 
you. You will never get there." When I went in I saw 
that he was alone. 



79<> 

This is the, story of the exalted ip .status people 
of Allah. If a rnan, is, : not able, to reach such high 
position of 'Nafs Kushi' <tex$$ , he fhQ\x\d & teijst 
try to act as much to this effect as possible. Does it do 
credit to.,a i Person tq T Jh^e; ine^t .every day? It is said 
that a person, .who eate^rnssat jsegularjy for forty days 
becomes $a*$,. ^earted;^ jViy< wers?> r .it .- ^ ^aid, .gpft.* a 
person who does not take meat for forty days at a , 
stretch becomes .'Bud Khoq', (Inaptly ad^rnantL Hence 
ttie t mean or the middle cou ;se should, be adopted. In 
any case, the TMal 1 (tli^ r% ildLclJ^ course. • terhperate 
way) wfis taught by H^zrat urqar Farooq (Allah be 
pleased with him) to hijs ,sori in i tKese^ words. "Have 
meat once,: take milk j once . take 4 Rjoghan' ; (liquid 
pallatise) once, then take some vinegar andl firy bread 
('Rookhi Roti'). 

The betterment lies in not being with full 
stomach. Otherwise t)>e two evils viz gluttony and 
neglect fronv'Ibadat' (Prayers i are likely to conjugate. It 
is in the 'Hadith' "Stop jover indulgence, in. eating and 
sleeping for 'Namaz'sand 'Zrt^'. pur ancestors used to 
say four 'Rakats' of 'Nafal' and a rosary after every 
meal and also used to recite 1he 'Holy ,Qur'an\ 

Hazrat Abu Sufian (Allah be pleased with him) 
rarely had a hearty meal bit if even he did take a 
normal meal he used to se engrossed in prayers 
ceaslessly all night. He used to say, "After you have 
fed an animal well you should take equally a$ much 
hard work from him. Never jjive into your desire for a 
thing. If you happen to find t, don't go on looking for 
it. If the worse comes to the worst and you start 
searching for it, don't hold it dear to you." 



795 



VIRTUE OF ABSTINENCE FROM 
FOOD: GLUTTONY AND ITS EVILS 

A 'Murshad' is an esteemed person of status. 
He has already gone through the mill. Hence the 
'Murid' should know that his span and status is 
Iflereht. The 'Rlazat-b-Mujahida' {Rigours, of worship 
and righteousness) that he prescribes for his 'Murid" is 
. for his goo.d, So, whenever he asks, his 'Murid' to 
abstain from eating , much, it is to purify his soul as 
. aforementioned. The angel like status achieved by the 
Pir {'Murshad') is after such 'Riazat'. He knows best 
how to go, about the Tarbiat' {Education and 
.upbringing) of. his 'Murid'. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessjngs of Allah 
be. upon him) used to be with 'Roza' (A fast) so often 
that people used to wonder when it is going to end. 
He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him), used to 
like honey and dates. Normally people used to hear 
Him. say, "I am with 'Roza'." 

Hazrat Maroof Karkhi (Rahmatullah Alaih) liked 
meat and honey but used to avoid them until people 
" in the house* used to insist on it. However, Hazrat 
Bashar Hafi (Rahmatuilah Alaih) used to decline to eat 
under such circumstances and used to say, "I am the 
guest of my Master. He looks after my- thirst and 
hunger. I feel very little urge for it now." The efficacy 
and importance of 'Riazat' and the care taken by 
'Ahlullah' of their 'Nafs' is proved by the fact that 
people of the outstanding calibre of Hazrat Bashar Hafi 
(Rahmatullah Alaih), Hazrat Sirri Saqti (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) and Hazrat Malik Dinar (Rahmatullah Alaih) 



7% 

were so particular about then and used to lay so much 
stress on them. They were very watchful. If this is the 
state of affairs with such accomplished 'Ahlullah', what 
should our reaction be, need hardly be repeated.' 

THE HAZARDS OF (JIVING UP EATING 
ALTOGETHER 

Two dangers are inheent in it. One of them is 
that some people are not •Qadir' (Competent) over 
giving up their 'Khawahishat' (The desires). There are 
people of different kinds. Foi instance, there is a man 
who wants to flaunt his petty, acts as if he is an 
abstinent but eats quietly, some times heartily, to boot. 
Satan has his sway. He may persuade others also to 
follow him suit. This is no: being a Muslim. It is 
'Munafiqat' (Hypocricy and treachery) with self and the 
'Deen'. Whereas there ar<! their opposites who 
purchase things from the bazaar, as if it is for their 
personal consumption but wh.m they reach home they 
send it to the 'Fuqara' for their use. It is a veritable act 
of the 'Siddiqs'. 

It's test lies in the fact that if the piety becomes 
the predominant nature of a good or a reformed 
person he becomes a man of gold, a refined person 
who has cast off the evil off him. In its antithesis, if 
doing good deeds is irksome and not instinctive then 
there is something wanting in the man. That 
something, may be a loot. 'Rfe* (Hypocricy : 
Arrognace) and 'Shahwat' may stij have an upper 
hand on him. Such a person had better take notice of 
himself. Otherwise, acting in self deception will not 
help him. It is no use trying to ruii away from rain 



797 



showers and take refuge under a drain. That is why 
the sages advocate that it is necessary, specially for 
such a person to put his 'Nafs' in the prison of hunger 
and deny him liberties of lust and licentuousness. It is 
an effective treatment of both the diseases of 'Ria' and 
* 'Bhook\ 

THE DANGERS OF SEXUAL DEPRAVITY 

Sex urge in man, which is blissful in its forte, is 
for procreation and posterity. It has been created for 
the prolongation of mankind on earth not for beastly 
enterprise. It has grave hazards. 

One day the Satan told Hazrat Moosa Alai Uas 
Salam (Prophet Moses to remain away from the 
privacy of women, specially beautiful women adding 
that in such an event vality i am also always there.' 
That is why in His Supreme Wisdom Allah always kept 
all His prophets protected from the menace of women, 
as such and the Satan always not his worst defect in 
this connection from them. 

This is a serious state of affairs. Under the 
circumstances its treatment is 'Roza' or the man should 
perform 'Nikah' i.e. enter into holy wedlock. The next 
course is that man should become devoid of sex urge. 
This too is not good. Hence, in case of 'Itidal' 
(Balanced behaviour), the longing for it should be 
subordinate to man. On the contrary, some persons 
use aphrodisiac stimulants to increase their sex 
potential. It is stupidity of the worst order. It is like 
wantonly stirring up a hornet's nest, however, it does 
not apply to a person who may have more than one 



798 I 

wife. It is in the 'Gharaibul Akhbar'ithat "once when I 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upiari him) felt -A little 
weakness Ma»at ^ibreel Alni UasjSalarri ' (Tfie arch 
angel Gabriel) advised me to taHe some 'Hareesa- 
(Steengtfieaing*p«^)v'^ ^ "•■■<■' - '- : '-' r;; - :; - ; iU j 

One of the Aafats (hazards) of 'Shahwat' is the 
Ishq' (HerMm^ meanfinf^ cf iexiia^ aifrac^fy Bodily* 
attraction). It is the cause of many sins. If a man is not 
guarding from the beginning he is liable to succumb to 
its-4ethal.imp^'.!rhe«im6st < pi , i«ierit thing ts to remain, 
with the veil of the eyes cart down. Otherwise there 
will be complications and no sarictuary left for the mart 
to hide himself in the 'Nafs' is like an animal. It is 
essential' to hold its reiris=iirnily>f iIhe:tnoment it tends 
to go , ast?ay, .it fis necessary? to- guide tt kto the right 
direction, straightaway, M it becomes wild* it will gist 
out of your contrpl. < v -, \ ; 

It is the f .staternefnt • of Hwat Saeed Bin Jabeer 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) that th* Jast words of advice of. 
Dawood Alai Uas Salam (P-ophet David) to his son 
were, "It is worthwhile going after a lion or a snake but 
never a woman." 

People asked Hazrat Yahyah Alat Uas Salam, 
"What is your opinion is the primary source of the evil 
of adultery?" he gave the answer in one word. 
"Adultery." Indeed, He was Prophet of Allah and he 
could not be more right. 

The Holy prophet (peace: and blessings of Allah 
be upon Him) has said that "the dart of a lecherous 
eye is a poison tipped arrow of 'Ibices' (Principal fallen 



799 

angel). A person who keeps his eyes sheltered with 
shame in the fear of Allah is blessed with eternal bliss 
by Him. And that "after Me (peace arid blessings of 
Allah be upon him) there will be no greater danger for 
men than tempting women; The eye of a man can be 
as perversa in Tina' (Adultery) as the man himself in 
his regrettable 1 moments." Sodomy is worse than that. 
Such a mean person is worse in his villiariy than a 
pouncing lion on its prey. 

A person related his own autobiography and 
said that "once I became so overcome with 'Shahwat' 
(Sexual urges of uncontrollable nature) that I started 
crying and entreating to Allah to come to my rescue 
and save me. That night a 'Buzurg' asked me in my 
dream. 'What 4s wrong With you?" I explained the- state 
of affairs to him. he patted me on my chest with his 
healing hands and I felt much better. After a year, the 
same situation recurred. The same Buzurg asked me in 
the dream. 'Do you want that your sex urges should 
vanish away?' I replied in the affirmative, he asked me 
to bow my head. 1 did so. Thereupon he slashed my 
head off with a sword. I woke up with a start but 
rested in peace for about a year. Thereafter the 
unfortunate curse fell on me again. Then the 'Buzurg' 
finally told me in the dream. 'How much more refuge 
can you seek? It is better that you get married.' i did so 
and performed Nikah." 

THE EXCELLENCE OF THE PERSON WHO 
OPPOSES ADULTERY 

The more severely a person opposes such evil 
sex urges the more 'Sawab' he will get. Nothing else 



800 



takes an upperhand on a men so much as 'Shahwat' 
does bqt it, is a worthless pursuit. As a result of it, 
many persons who can not overcome it, feel a terrible 
dread of shame and public disgrace. However, the 
man who manages to sdmetnw remain away from it 
for this reason, though fortunate, does not get any 
'Sawab' for it due to his obstention from the evil due to 
reasons of worldly important not because of the 
.'Deen', the Faith, nevertheless to be saved of a 
heinous crime is a. blessing in itself, in any way. Vice 
versa, if a person is 'Qadir' on 'Shahwat' i.e. has the 
necessary sources to act so without constraint of any 
kind and yet refrains from it ior the fear of Allah, he 
gets immense 'Sawab' for it. As stated such a person is 
one amongst those singularly blessed seven people 
who would be installed on 'Mosnade Aa'la' i.e. on the 
seat of honour, under the 'Arsh' on the Day of 
Judgement. His status in this veritable achievement par 
excellence would be equivalent to that of Hazrat 
Yousaf Alal ua-Salam (Prophe : joseph), who would be 
their forerunner in vanguard on the Day of Judgment. 

A beautiful woman became enamoured of 
Hazrat Sulaiman Bin Bashar (Rahmatullah Alaih) who 
was an extremely handsome person. She offered 
herself to him. He ran : or his life in panic 
instantaneously. The very sane right he saw Hazrat 
Yousaf Alai Uas Salam (Prophet Joseph well known 
for his 'Husn' Beauty. 'Husn<s Yusuf has become a 
proverbial term since then') in his dream. He enquired, 
"Are you Hazrat Yousuf Alai Uas Salam?" He replied, 
"Yes I am the very same Ycusuf. But you are that 
Suleman who ran away from it faster than me. The 
implied reference is to the following verse of the Holy 



801 



Qur'an. 

(Yi:U-ij4) ....I^^ajj, juc-ijb jil j 

She indeed besought him; and he would 
besought her.... (12:24) 

The same Hazrat Sulaiman Bashar 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) has also related an other painful 
incident of his life viz "I used to go to 'Madinae 
Munawwara' almost daily. One day, on our way back, 
my companion left me for a while at a place called 
'Abwa', to make some purchases. A beautiful woman 
came to me soon after he left, looked at me in a 
beseeching manner and said 'Oh Saqi! For God's sake 
fill my measure with 'Wasl'. I mistook her completely. I 
thought that she was hungry. Hence I hurriedly spread 
the 'Dastar Khwan' (Dinner cloth) for her quickly and. 
asked her to eat. She replied that she was not hungry. 
She wanted physical conjugation in love with me. I 
was astonished, i started crying out in panic 
whereupon she left me. When my companion returned 
he asked me why was I looking so morose. I made an 
excuse and said, "Because I had suddenly come to 
think of my family members." He was an astute person 
and told me, "How come? You are not married!" 
Therefore I had to tell him the truth. To my 
amazement he also started weeping when he heard my 
story and remarked, "If I was in your place, I would 
not have been able to act, as you did." After that we 
went to 'Makkha Mukarrama'. After Tawafo Saee' I 
went to sleep in a 'Hujra' (Secluded place), suddenly I 
saw a singularly handsome person in the dream, f 
asked him, "Who are you?" He answered, "I am,; 
Yousuf." i enquired submissively. "Are you Yousuf 



802 



Siddiq?" He replied, "Yes". I again said, "The episode 
of 'Zanan-e-Misr' (The wonen of Misr - Egypt) with 
you is very famous and strangely unique, he replied, 
"The episode of Zanan-e-Aerabi' is stranger than that." 

It has been narrated by Hazrat Ibne Umar (Allah 
be pleased with him) that th2 Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessing of Allah be upon him) related to them that in 
the olden days three people went on a journey. After 
a tiring day they decided to take refuge in a cave. 
However to their dismay they suddenly heard a 
deafening sound and realised that they had become 
prisoners in the cave, as a big boulder had come 
rolling down the hill and had shut it's entrance. 
Realising that there was no way out; they started 
praying to Allah fr mercy, as only a miracle could save 
them. 

One of them raised his hands in fervent prayer 
and said, "Oh Allah, you know that when my old 
parents were alive. I used to look after them from the 
core of my heart. You know that neither I, nor any 
member of my family used 1o take our meals until they 
had taken them first. So m ach so, that one day I was 
late, when I reached home, my parents had gone to 
sleep. My children were clamouring for milk but I 
waited with the jug of milk in my hands all night till the 
dawn of the day and gave rr»y hungry children the milk 
after they had taken it, th<i next morning. Nothing is 
hidden from you. Oh Allah! You know that this act of 
mine was just for yojr 'Raza' (Happiness : 
Acceptance). Hence, save ne and my friends from this 
disaster. Thereupon, the stane moved a little but not 
enough so that they could get out." 



803 



After that the next man started crying 
beseechingly-and said, "Oh Allah! You are the knower 
of the unknown. You are aware that I had fallen head 
over heels in love with my paternal uncle's beautiful 
daughter. She kept on resisting my lustful advances for 
a long time until, the land became beset with famine. 
She came round a bit and started smiling whenever 
she met me. One day I gave her one hundred and 
twenty dinars on the condition that she would fulfill my 
desire. When we were on the verge of it, she started 
trembling and said, "Aer'nt you afraid of Allah, to 
break His seal without His permission." I got scared of 
you and spared her. After that I never went near her. 
Oh Allah! If this act of mine has pleased you have pity 
on me and my colleagues and come to our rescue. We 
are badly stranded." Thereupon, the boulder moved a 
little more, but yet not so much that they could get 
out. 

Subsequently, the third person started praying 
most supplicatingly and said, "Oh Allah the most 
Merciful! You are fuljy aware the once I had deployed 
some labourers to do some job for me. I had paid the 
remunerations to all of them except one who had left 
v the place before I could do so. I looked high and low 
for him but could not find him. Thereupon I bought a 
goat, of his money to begin with. I kept on trading 
with it till a lot of 'Mai' (Assets and money) was 
accumulated, legitimately. Suddenly he called on me 
and asked for his 'Haq'. I said, "Come and take it." 
Then I gave him a lot of money including many goats, 
cows, camels, 'Laundie-o-Ghulam' (Slaves female and 
male), which had fortunately accrued to his profit, out 
of the basic investment of his 'Mazdoori' 



804 



(Remuneration for labour). He. went happily with it 
when I explained the circumstances to him. My Lord 
and Master, you know well tha: I did not keep a dime 
out of it. Therefore, I implore You to have mercy on 
me and on my friends. Only You can do so." 
Immediately, the door of the :ave flew open with a 
grating sound. The boulder cane apart and they got 
their liberty, by the will of Allah so pleased was He! 

Hazrat Bakar Bin Abdullah bin Almuzni 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) has sta-ed that a 'Qassaab' 
(Butcher) fell in love with the 'Laundi' (Slave girl : 
Hand maiden) of his neighbour. One day he started 
chasing her on the road, got beyond himself in its 
solitary nook and embraced her. She beat him and 
said, "I love you more than you do. But I am afraid of 
Allah." When he heard this be stated trembling and 
told her, "If you are afraid of Allah why should I too 
not be araid of Him?"he was sincere about it and 
repented of his folly sorely. While he was returning 
back from there he felt so thirs:y and famished that he 
thought he is going to die. The Prophet of the day, 
happened to see him and ask 2d him, "What's wrong 
with you?" He replied, "I am dying of thirst." He told 
the butcher, "let us pray. Ratier you say the prayer 
and I will say 'Ameen' (Be it so, with the Grace of 
Allah)." They did so. Suddenly it got heavily overcast. 
At the time of parting they saw that the 'Qassab' was 
' walking under the shade of the clouds and the prophet 
in the sun. Thereupon the Prophet turned round and 
asked the butcher, "You said that you had no part of 
worship and verity with you. How did come than these 
clouds came oyer so quickly because of you?" The 
butcher described the incident of his 'Tauba' to him in 



805 



discreet words, respectfully. The Prophet was satisfied 
and said, "You are perfectly right. No one else is near 
to Allah's mercy and blessings more than a truly 
repentant person!" 

THE CURSE OF 'NAZRE HARAM' (OGLING) AT 
THE WOMEN 

It is one of the curios, that in debating the issue, 
it may be presumed that a man has the habit or 
'Qudrat' (Power) over it and yet refrains from it. In 
final analysis, it is advisable to keep the eye cloistered 
from the beginning and be on the guard of the 
subsequent consequences. Ogling is a very bad habit. 
Hazrat Allama Bin Ziyad (Rahmatullah Alaih) has gone 
to the extent of saying that "the man should try and 
not cast even an eye on the 'Chadar' (The covering 
sheet) of a 'Na Mahram' woman. It is apt to generate 
'Shahwat' (Sexual desire) in him." 

Coming to brass tacks, it is not 'Wajib' 
(desirable) to look at the 'Libas' (Dress) of a woman, to 
smell the fragrance of perfume she wears and to listen 
to her. Leave aside sending her a message it is better 
not to even cross her path, as far as possible. The 
matter is similicity itself that 'Husn-o-Jamal' (Beauty) 
and 'Ma'siat' (Sinfulness) go together. 

Avoiding the opposite sex applies as much to 
# women as to men. To do so want only is a Gunah 
(Sin). In comparison, if a man happens to look at a 
woman inadvertently, by chance, it is one of the e 
things and not a 'Gunah'. But, after having cast an 
innocent glance on a woman once, to look back at l.er 



806 



is 'Haram'. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) has said in this regard that "a 
man's sudden first glance at a woman is in order but 
the second one is 'Haram'. If he falls in love with her, 
conceals it in his heart, protect s himself and dies, he is 
a'Shaheed'; (Martyr)." 

"Beware, that there is nothing more devastating 
and instigating to evil than th<: ogling of the opposite 
sexes at each other in lax, mixed parties. To be 
without 'Purdah' (covering veil and flirtations is worse 
on the part of a woman. It is v<!ry provocative. 

The face of the woman going out covered in on 
ostensibly clean sheet with her face uncovered is 
likewise deplorable and 'Haram'. The father, brother or 
the husband - whoever allows the woman to do so, is 
responsible for it 

likewise, it does not be nave a man to act in an 
unseenly manner. 

A. Like, wearing.the type cf clothes women wear. 

B. Or, to fondle their dress or smell its perfume. 
G. Present gifts of flowers etc to them. 

D. To, fawn on women. 

Nor, for that matter, should a woman behave in 
similar fashion towards a man If a man has to speak 
to woman sometimes under some extenuating 
circumstances, he must speak to her curtly. Allah, the 
Omnipotent has addressed the 4 Azwaj-e-Mutahharat' 
(The venerated wives of the Koly Prophet May peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) and said: 



807 



( r Y : j^') lij/i iTjl jlS j 

If you keep your duty (to Allah), then be 
not soft in speech, lest he is whose heart is 
a disease (of hypocrisy or evil desire for 
adultery, etc.) should be moved with 
desire, but speak in an honourable 
manner. (33 : 32) 

However, Hazrat Ayyub Ansari (Allah be 
pleased with him) , his wife and sons used to 
particularly look for the opportunity to drink water 
from that glass, of which the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) may have taken water, 
reverently. This is a singular example of 'Barkat' 
(Blessing Happy Augry) . The aforementioned 
instances are distinctly self explanatory and are better 
to be avoided. The Satan is on, to misguide people. It 
is the duty of the faithful to resist him staunchly and 
refrain from all those things which promote Satanic 
sexual thoughts and urges' in them. 

The special weapon of the Satan is to bewitch 
people with beauty. He tries to make the man fall for a 
beautiful woman head long. It is related that one day 
the eyes of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) happened to fall on a woman on 
t^e rad. He returned home immediately, conjugated 
with His wife, had a bath, came out again and said, 
"The Satan attack's the man when he sees a woman, 
he should conjugate with his wife immediately. Your 
wife possesses the same thing which the other woman 



803 

does." 

THE CURSE OF TALKING TOO MUCH 
AIMLESSLY : THE DANG ERS OF THE TONGUE 

Ostensibly, the tongu i is a lump of flesh but in 
its power it is a genet of wonder. It's scope and span is 
vast, although it Is subordinate to 'Aqil' - the ration, in 
man. In turn, the wit - the wisdom is veritably manifest 
till far reaches of reasoning end imagination. The other 
parts of the man's body dc not possess this quality. 
Whatever brews in the 'AqiP mind of man is translated 
by the tongue whether it i< an established fact or a 
'Wahm' (conjecture). For instance, the eye's focus is 
limited to seeing the things n their purview and their 
colours. Likewise the ear's access is to listening to 
voices only. The other organs of the body is also 
similarly constituted anc their capability is 
circumscribed. 

The tongue collects the percepts from different 
organs of the body and sends their sifted facsimiles to 
the heart before it utters anything. Thus, the heart 
attains an attribute every time a thought process is in 
action. As a result, when the man in distress cries, the 
heart becomes sombre, doleful and affected in its 
perspective. In the intricate iiteraction, the fire of the 
febrile heart reaching the brein of man starts draining 
in the shape of tears; from his eyes. Likewise, vice 
versa, when the man is in a state of extreme delight 
and is joyously expressing it with his tongue, his heart 
gets flooded with extreme hzppiness. It shows on his 
face and in his entire demear our. In other words, the 
heart of man starts feeling the sentiments that the 



809 



tongue is expressing. Naturally, when the tongue says 
a bad thing, it darkens the heart and when the tongue 
utters the good words, the heart of man is illuminated. 
Absurd talk makes the receptivity of the heart awry, 
resultantly it an not see things clearly and in their right 
perspective. Hence the Taabir' (The meaning of the 
dream or thought conceived) varies. The heart of a 
pact or a gossiping babbler becomes tarnished due to 
its senseless and supine chatter, hence his dream is 
seldom true, nor is that of a liar because of the topsy 
turvy images formed by his talk in his heart. The heart 
of such a person can, as such, never have the honour 
of the 'Ziarat-e-Marafat Ilahi' (Discerning the verity of 
the cognizance of Allah) in this world and in the 
hereafter. He will never be able to savour its supreme 
delight. An illformed sword or its awry sheath can 
never conjoin and are also ugly to look at. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has said that "the health and happiness of 'Eiman' 
depend, on the heart and that of the heart depends on 
the man's tongue. Hence, the piety of the tongue is 
one of the pre-requisites of 'Deen'." 

THE BLESSING OF SILENCE 

As there are many dangers inherent in a 
wagging tongue and it is very difficult for a person to 
prevent himself from it, there is nothing better than to 
remain silent, as far as possible. One should not talk 
more than, is necessary. Our worthy ancestors used to 
say that "a person who can limit his eating, talking and 
sleeping within confines is a 'AbdaaP (An eminent 
saint) 



510 

There is no good in much of their 
conspiring except for him who bids to 
offering, or desirable things, or setting 
things right between the people. (4 : 114) 

This is what Allah las ordained in the Hoiy 
Book. And the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) has said, "Man Samata Naja" i.e. 
he, who kept quiet was saved. 

Once Hazrat Ma'az (Allah be pleased with him) 
asked the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) about an estimable act. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
brought his tongue out and put a restraining finger on 
it, meaning thereby - that "Silence". 



Hazrat Umar Farooq (Allah be pleased with 
him) has stated that "one da / I saw Hazrat Abu Bakar 
Siddiq (Allah be pleased wrh him) pulling his raised 
tongue. I asked him about it. He replied, This 
wretched thing is the source of many evils'." 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) remarked onc«t that "most of the faults 
of the man are due to his fbngue. Let me tell you the 
easiest form of paying faithful service to Allah. It lies in 
silence and in an amiable derreanour." 



811 



The following sayings of the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) are 
oftquoted. 

"Tell that man who believes in Allah and in the 
Day of Judgement to always utter only the good or 
else remain silent." 

"If you happen to see a silent and dignified 
person, try to seek his company, for such a man is 
always 'Sahib-e-Hikmat' (Wise : Sagaciou)." 

"A blabber never speaks the truth, he commits 
many mistakes voluntarily or involuntarily. He is a 
great sinner due to mischief he causes, hence he goes 
to Hell for it." 

Likewise, the following advice given by the 
Prophet Isa Alai Uas Salam (Holy Christ) is veritable. 

"Remain silent. Speak only what is necessary." 

"Allah's faithful reverence and worship lies nine 
parts out of ten in silence. The tenth part consists of 
running away from people." 

Hazrat Siddiqe Akbar (Allah be pleased with 
him) used to keep small pebbles under his tongue, 
sometimes, so that he may not speak. 

Hazrat Ibne Mas'ood (Allah be pleased with 
him) has said that the best punishment for a wayward 
and beligerant tongue is to imprison it in the mouth. 



812 



It is related that Hazrat Rabi Bin Khasheem 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) did not talk about the affairs of 
the world for twenty years. Whenever he had to say a 
thing to someone; which ne could not help, he used to 
write it down on a piece af paper and used to show it 
to him. At night, he used to reflect on his performance 
in terms of time and truth wasted in idle talk. 





Talking is of four k nds. 


1. ,. 


Speech which is tolally dangerous. 


2. 


Speech having good and the bad, both 


3. 


Speech without any profit or loss. A sheer 




waste of time. 


4. 


Veritable speech. 




It means tfeat three parts out of four, silence is 



superior to speech, as Allan the Merciful has ordained. 

( nt:*UJl) ....SlX^y'^ Jl 

Except for him who bids to offering. . . . 

(4 : 114) 

And the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has given this a ivice. 

A 

i « i . i 

"He, who kept quiet was saved/' 
(Tirmizi, Kitab al-Q\yamah, Bab No. 50) 

Hence, it is worth while going into the dangers 
caused by the tongue. 

The first loss danger is contained in saying a 



813 



thing which is not necessary i.e. it is neither good for 
'Deen' nor for 'Dunya'. Such unwarranted speech 
makes the man lose the virtue and the 'Husn' (The 
beauty) of Islam, as per the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) . 

"The beauty of a person's Faith in Islam 
lies in his refraining from uncalled for and 
impolite speech." 

(Tirmizi, Kitab al-Zuhd, Bab No. 11) 

This 'Hadith Mubarak' is self xplanatory. There 
are many ways of doing it, asr for instance :- 

1. To talk at length of one's 'Hikayat' tales of the 
journey undertaken, describing the entire 
travelogue in minutest details of one's travail in 
sands and mountains etc. 

2. To talk about useless and irrelevant things with 
people. Asking them silly questions. 

3. To ask a person, if he is fasting? His telling the 
truth world tantamount to 'Izhar' of 'Ibadat' i.e. 
the expression of his verity of worship. The 
virtue lies in its containment and not in its 
advertisement. Vice-versa, if he tells a lie he will 
become a 'Gunahgar' (A sinner). The asker of 
the silly question will also thus become a 
'Gunahgar' himself. 

4. Likewise, it is not desirable to ask such 
question, as, 'from where are you coming' or 
what do you do' etc, for, at times the other 



814 



person may not wish to tell them. It is likely that 
the person may tell a lie to cover what he wants 
to suppress. This will put him in jeopardy and 
make him Gunahgar (sinful). A person who 
places another jjerson into such a false 
position becomes sinful also, if the later tells a 
falsehood. 

It is said that he legendary famous sage 
Luqman Hakim used tD assist and serve Hazrat 
Dawood Alai Uas Salam [Prophet David). He used to 
make 'Zarah' i.e. he was an armourer. Despite the fact 
that 'Luqman Hakim' was very inquisitive about it, he 
did not ask him about it for a year. It was after that, 
that one day Hazrat Dawood Alai Uas Salam told 
Luqman Hakim that "it i; a very useful thing in the 
battle for a man," that he :ame to know about it. 

There is sagacity and untold wisdom in 
remaining to the point and silent. There is no sense or 
virtue in being inquisitive iibout others. For someone it 
may be a source of findirg his faults out and for the 
other a way out to make friends with him to gain his 
own ends. Both of these things are ignoble. It is better, 
that rather than to behave in such a manner, the man 
should recollect his 'Maut' (Death), count his blessings 
and not waste a momeni in idle or Un-harmonious 
pursuits. This is as per *Ilm o-Aqil' (The knowledge and 
wisdom). However, the practical approach is that 
rather than do so, the man had better put some 
pebbles in his mouth so that it remain closed. When 
the affected mother of a 'Shaheed' (A martyr) in the 
Battle of 'Uhud' saw her son, she found that he had 
tied a stone to his stomach to ward off hunger. She 



815 



was seen cleaning the dust and perspiration from his 
glowing face and muttering these words. She was 
speaking sooth. 

"Congratulations to you on having 
attained the 'Jannat' (Paradise)" 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has repeatedly emphasised that a man 
should not be 'Bakhul' (Miserly : Niggardly) and should 
also not embarass people by asking another man 
questions which may be a personal or delicate nature. 
One day, the Holy Prophet (peace and blessing of 
Allah be upon him) said, "A person is about to enter 
from this door who is from 'Ahle Jannat' (Rightful or 
Paradise). Simultaneously, soon after His having said 
these words, Hazrat Abdullah Bin Salam (Allah be 
pleased with him) entered from that door. People 
congratulated him. Informed him of its background 
and asked him, "Do you know the reason of this 
singular blessing?" He replied, "I am extremely pleased 
but I do not know anything special that I have done to 
earn this reward, except for the fact that I do not 
remain inquisitive about things and people which do 
not concern one, nor do I wish people ill." 

A 'Sahabi' (Allah be pleased with him) once told 
his friend that "I believe, that without being curt, if I 
answer a question asked, in two sentences which can 
be answered in one sentence, I am wasting the 
decorum of good behaviour." 



815 



Another 'Sahabi' (Allah be pleased with him) 
said a similar things when hi} remarked that "if I have a 
ready answer to a question asked as good as fresh cool 
water is to a thirsty person, I hesitate giving it, at times, 
lest it should be undesirable." 

Hazrat Mutrib Bin Abdullah (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
has remarked that the veneration and awe of Allah 
should be so in dwelling in a man that he should not 
even sit, as an animal does, without uttering the name 
of Allah but should refrain from saying derogatory 
things about an other persor . 

There is another saying of the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) that "he is 
a 'Nek Bakht' (Fortunate : ISlessed) who refrains from 
talking too much and feels happy to give more 'Mai' in 
charity, for Allah. He (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) added that "Allah does not like a 
slanderous foolish talker. Allah has proclaimed in the 
Holy Book." 

Not a word he utters t ut by him is a ready 
observer. (50 : 18) 

The second damaging thing is that conflict in 
views create grave misunderstandings and quarrels. 
Some self-contred, conceited persons consider 
themselves to be very clever and always go to 
extremes, thinking that thev, are right and the other 
person is wrong. It breeds contempt. The arrogance 
and callousness adds fuel to fire and mattes get more 



817 

aggravated, resulting in catastrophic conditions.That is 
why the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has warned against it and said that "a 
person who is careful is avoiding acrimony and discord 
in conversation, never says anything humiliating and 
unfair in his dealings with others, a house is made for 
him in its reward in 'Jannat'. And if he goes to the 
extent of not even saying the 'Haq Bat' (The nascent, 
truth) so that the other person is not offended - to 
forestall a quarrel, begets a house made for him 
specially in the 'Jannatul Firdaus'." The 
aforementioned higher reward for the considerate 
person in conversation is due to the fact that it is very 
difficult to be patient with a person who is a liar and 
pretends with impunity that he is right. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has further added that 'in the achievement of the real 
grand status of 'Eiman' ('Eimane Kamil) , the excellence 
lies in the man acting savely by with drawing from the 
clash and conflict, even though he may be right (and 
the other person or party wrong) . 

It may be kept in mind that such disagreements, 
some of them of a strong nature are not necessarily of 
a religious nature. They can be on anything - any 
subject. For instance a person may say that this 
pomegranate is sweet. The other may can say, 'No. It 
is sour." likewise one person can state that such and 
such place is at a distance of one kilometer from her. 
The other person may disagree with it. To be crazy at 
such trifling things is to make a mountain of a mole 
hill. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 



8L8 



be upon him) has said that "if you happen to make the 
mistake of entering into a quarrel or fight with 
somebody, you must say twD Rakaats of Namaz (prayer) 
as its expiation." It is wo-th-while remembering that 
in controvertial matters it is 'haram' to be continuously 
finding faults in the point of view of the other fellow. 
On the contrary, silence is the virtuous part of 'Eiman' 
in such delicate matters. Tnere is nothing worse than 
creating of bad blood between the faithful. The 'Jaddal' 
(Severe conflict in matters of Faith) is the worst. 

To put in a good, u ncontrovertial word in such 
situations is on thing but to fan the fire of dissent by 
picking up holes in one's adversary, to show off one's 
virtuosity and wisdom is another. That is precisely why 
Luqman Hakim the esteemed sage, gave advice to his 
son, one day and said, "Soi, be patient with the 'Ahle 
Ilm' i.e. the learned. Do not ever quarrel with them." 

There is a praiseworthy greatness in remaining 
patient and silent of a 'Be Mahalo Batil' (Impossible 
and untrue) thing. The point is elucidated by the 
noteworthy statement o Hazrat Dawood Tai 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) . One day Hazrat imam Abu 
Hunifa (Rahmatullah Alaih, asked him, "Why have 
you gone into seclusion. We miss you so much?" 
Hazrat Dawood Tai (Rahmatullah Alaih) replied, "I 
want to refrain from conflicts and confusion by 
'Mujahida' (veritable excerclse)." Hazrat Abu Hanifa 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) said, "Nevertheless kindly do 
attend the 'Manazras' (Relic ions debates) and remain 
quiet, if you like." He, (Hazrat Tai Rahmatullah Alaih) 
answered, "I have come ta this inside corner after 
having done so for a long time. There is nothing more 



819 



testing for a man than |his." 

It is criminal to quarrel and say so, and make 
believe that 'we are fighting for the 'Deen'. Islam is a 
very lofty 'Deen' but not only it, no 'Deen' i.e. Faith 
permits it. Such squabbles are devil's workshop. That is 
why the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has forewarned the Ummah that often, a 
'Qaum' (People : Nation) is misguided due to 'Jadl' 
(Mutinous disputes). Hazrat Malik Bin Annas (Allah be 
pleased with him) has also said that the 'Jadal' has 
nothing to do with the Faith ('Deen'). This was the 
opinion of our praise- worthy ancestors too. If they 
found a person to be a 'Bidatee' (Diversive and 
mischief mongering); a non-conformist to the 'Holy 
Qur'an' and the 'Hadith', these venerated people of 
high principles never quarrelled with him, nor entered 
into a prolonged debate to no purpose with him; only 
informed him of the truth in so many words and 
finding that, as expected, it has had no effect on him 
kept quiet and diverted their faces away from him. 

The fourth hazard lies in a dispute over 'Mai'. 
Whether this unfortunate discord my be subjudice with 
a 'Qazi' (A learned judge) or not, il is very painful. The 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) has therefore stressed strongly on forestalling such 
situations, as they are the cause and also the effect of 
antipathy among brother Muslims. The sages of the 
olden times also used to say that such disputes 
between people give rise to the corruption of the soul, 
make the life of the faithful miserable and the tolerance 
for each other between them grows weaker and 
weaker day by day till they become a spent force. In 



820 



short, to say the right thing without any slight or slur in 
it, is the wise course to adopt, in such cases. Otherwise 
silence and fortitude is of the essence. The ruin of faith 
between the faithful is always due to such bickering 
and disharmony. It has got tc be forestalled at all costs 
to save the 'Deen'. 

The. fifth calamity is that when people are 
foolish they tend to lose the r heads and use strong, 
abusive language against «?ach other. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessing of Allah be upon him) has 
therefore said that "the 'Jannat' is 'Haram ' on a 
'Fuhshgo' (A user of insulting, dirty language)." He has 
clarified that the 'Ahle Dozakh' (The residents of Hell) 
would clamorously protest against the stink emerging 
of the mouth of such a person, on the Day of 
Judgement." 

According to Hazral Ibrahim Bin Maisra 
(Rahmatullah Alaih),' the final destination of a person, 
who is in the habit of using smutty language, is Hell. 
His face would be like that of a hound on the Day of 
the Judgement. A person who uses vulgar, obscene 
language displays the colour or his own mind. 

One day the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) remarked that "the person who 
abuses his parents will go to hell. He has Allah's curse 
on him." The listners were shocked and respectfully 
asked, "Who would such a person be Ya Rasoolullah?" 
He replied, "He, who calls tne parents of an other 
person bad names." 

If adultery be the subject, ever, it should be 



821 



referred to be a delicate hint to this effect, in an 
oblique form, without using dirty, stinking words. The 
words use should be carefully selected for their 
implications and connotations. In the case of 'Jama* - 
i.e. adultery the woman should not be called by 
name, publicly. In the same manner leprosy and piles 
should be substituted by milder words denoting these 
diseases. 

The sixth harm lies in cursing and condemning 
a person. Even to curse an animal is bad. It is the 
'Farman' (Saying : Order) of the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) that "a Musulman 
never sends 'Laa'nat' (Curse : Malediction) on 
anyone." It is related that once a woman was also in 
'Safar' (Travel : Journey) in the caravan, with the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him). 
When she sent a Laa'nat on the camel. He said, "Bare 
this animal and remove it from the caravan. It is 
cursed." That camel kept on roaming about here and 
there no one went near him, after that. 

Hazrat Abu Darda (Allah be pleased with him) • 
has said that when a person sends a 'Laa'nat' on 
someone or something then the matter becomes very 
serious, as, then that person or thing says that 

'Whoever amongst us on an offender is accursed.' The 
curse is an actually on him. One day, when Hazrat 
Siddiqe Akbar (Allah be pleased with him) cursed 
something, the Holy Prophet (Peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) remarked: 



82'/ 



"O Abu Bakr! You are the most truful and 
yet you have cursed. By the Token of 
Lord of Ka'ba! The most truthful and yet 
you have cursed. By th > Tokent of Lord of 
Ka'ba! The most truth and yet you have 
cursed." 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) repeated these words thrice. Hazrat Abu 
Bakar Siddiq (Allah be pleased with him) begged 
forgiveness of Allah for it and released a 'Ghulam (A 
slave) in its 'Kaffara' (expiatior >. 

However to pass 'Laa'nat' on the 'Kafirs', 
'Fasiqs' and 'Zalims' is in ordjr. But to send 'Laa'nat' 
on a people or person on wh ich the 'Shari'at' has not 
sent 'Laa'nat' is not correct. But if a person sends 
'Laa'nat' on 'Abu JihaP or on 'Phiraun' it is 'Jaiz' 
(Permissible : Regular) . " 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has sent 'Laa'nat' on some 'Kafirs' by 
name only after having come to know of it 'Min Janib 
Allah' (From Allah). Howevei to send 'Laa'nat' on a 
'Yahoodi' (A Jew), is wrong, 'or all we know he may 
become a brother Muslim after some time and turn out 
to be a better person than the one who has sent 
'Laa'nat' on him. 

A person asked the Haly Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon hirr) to give him a sermon. 
He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) said, 
"Never send 'Laa'nat' on anyone." So much so, that 



823 



considering the implications of 'Laa'nat' it is a more 
worthy act to start sayiftg the rosary of Allah, than to 
send 'Laa'nat' on 'Iblees' (The chief fallen angel) who is 
accursed! 

The seventh evil lies in saying 'Hajee' (Poetic 
satire : Derogatory remarks passed in poetry) of 
somebody. If we pass such adverse remarks against 
somebody, his religion or his elders, he is likely to do 
the same to us, which we won't like. So why do so? 

The eighth danger lies in frivolous behaviour. 
Frolicsome activities of an unrestrained nature, 
sometimes bordering on pandemonium is wrong. 
There is no harm in occassional festivity of an innocent 
nature. But to be non serious all the time and waste 
away the purpose of life in loud noisy laughs and over- 
indulgence in disrespectful enterprises wearing a smile 
on the face continuously is not conducive to good 
behaviour. It is one thing to be. good natured, but 
absolutaly another to act like a foolish cross the limits 
and become indecent. It is infra-dig to do so. Too 
much of laughing is also bad. Once the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) remarked 
that "the things which have become 'Munkashif 
(Revealed : Clear) to me, if you come to know of 
them, you would laugh less and cry more." A 'Buzurg' 
once said a redeeming thing to a person viz "You are 
not aware that we will have to pass through the 
'Dozakh', in any case, because it is the 'Farman' (The 
proclamation) of Allah. 



8124 

o k& C dip Ji. t tf, - , ^ 

And there is none among you, but he shall 
arrive there; it is a thing definite, and 
decreed by thy Lord. (19 : 71) 

It is said that Hazra: S'alma (Allah be pleased 
with him) did not laugh for iorty years. 

Hazrat Wahhab Bin Alward (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
saw some people laughing on the occasion on 'Eid' 
He remarked that "if Allah has graciously accepted 
their 'Rozas' (Fasting during the month of 'Ramadan') 
and has forgiven their sins, n that case laughing is not 
the trait of grateful people and in case their fasting 
during the month of 'Ramadan' has not been 
accredited by Allah, then it is all the more necessary 
that they should have not been laughing. They should 
have been in the fear of the v/rath of Allah." 

Hazrat Ibn-e-Abbas (A lah be pleased with him) 
remarked one day, "Take nctice. That person will go 
straight to Hell who commits 1 sin and laughs." 

One day Hazrat Muhammad Bin Wasih 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) asked this people, "Won't people 
be surprised if a person is seen crying in 'Bahisht' 
(Pradise)?" People said, "Indeed. Yes." He asked 
again, "Then why are you not surprised over the 
person who laughs in this wor d, not knowing whether 
he will go to Paradise or Hell?' 



One day a 'Badawi' came to pay his respects to 



825 



the Holy' Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) on a camel and seeing him said, "As 
Salamo Alaikum Ya Rasollulah" (Peace and greetings 
be to you, Oh Prophet of Allah). The more he was 
trying to reach near the Holy Prophet, the more the 
camel was adamant to go forward. Seeing this the 
Sahabae Karam (Allah be pleased with them) started 
laughing. However, in the meantime the 'Badwi' fell 
down from the camel in this struggle and died on the 
spot. People said, "He has fallen down and died." The 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) remarked, "And your faces are red with his 
blood. You were laughing at him." 

Hazrat Abdullah Bin Abdul Aziz (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) used to say, "Have fear of Allah. Don't be 
funny with others. Don't mock at them. It creates spite 
in their hearts. It leads to many evils. Laxity pervades. 
It is far better that when you foregather ('Majlis') you 
do so to speak from the Holy Book Allah and recollect 
the veritable deeds of the esteemed and the 'Allahu 
Allah' of the past. It will make your hearts chaste and 
reward you with piety of 'Ahle Taqwa' (The Chaste) . 

Hazrat Umar-e-Farooq remarked once that 
"when a person makes somebody the laughing stock of 
people by his irresponsible talk, he does not realise it 
but in reality he ridicules and humiliates himself." 

The 'Sahabae Karam' (Allah be pleased with 
them) have quoted only a few words said in a light 
vein by the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) in his entire life time. They have related 
that once the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 



Allah be upon him) humorously told an old lady that 
"the old people will not go to 'Jannat' (The Paradise) ." 
The poor lady started weeping. Then the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of AlUih be upon him) pacified 
her quickly and said, "They will first be brought to their 
youth (Soora-e-Waqa'a : Holy Qur'an)." 

Likewise, one day a lady said to the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessing;; of Allah be upon him), 
"Ya Rasoolulah (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him). My husband remembers you a lot," The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessing:; of Allah be upon him) 
asked her, "Is that man not your husband who has the 
white in his eyes?" She replied, "No. Ya Rasoolullah 
(peace and blessings of Alah be upon him). My 
husband has no such thing in his eyes." The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
responded to her and said, "There is no man who 
does not have the white in his eyes." 

One person requested the Holy Prophet" (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upc n him) for a camel. He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) replied, 
"You will be given the child of a camel." He humbly 
submitted, "Ya Rasoolulah (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him), I want <i camel. What will I do 
with the child of a camel?" T ie Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) replied, "Is the 
camel not the child of a came , no matter how big he 
is?" The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) had a unique sense of humour. 

The nineth evil is that sometimes people ridicule 
others, mimic them. Such lampooning and vain 



827 



impersonation is apt to be hurting, specially if they 
have some inherent defect or are incapacitated in some 
way. For instance, tor indulge in the travesty of a 
person who is lame or is old and back-bowed is to 
cause him pain for something which he can not help. 
It is 'Haram'. So is, to speak in such a tone or texture 
to a person whereby he may likewise become a 
laughing stock of people, deplorable. It is in the Holy 
Qur'an. 

Let not a people scoff at another people 
who may be better than they .... (49 : 1 1 ) 

Indeed one should never mock at a person. For 
all we know he may be a better person in all respects 
than the idle jester. So much so that the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) has said 
that "if a person resorts to backbiting of a person who 
may have reformed of an evil and sought forgiveness 
of Allah, the perpetrator of such wanton default is 
severely punished by Allah. On the day of Judgement 
he will be called to the door of 'Jannat' but when he 
reaches near it, it will be shut close on his face for his 
felony. He will be beckoned to several doors of the 
Paradise likewise and each time the door of the 
Paradise will be closed off to him, in lieu." 

The tenth evil is in telling" a lie. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has foretold the traits of a hypocrite and said that "a 



8:>8 



person who has any of the three undesirable habits In 
him i.e. of telling lies, of «joing back on his word of. 
honour of 'Khianat' (Dishonesty in trust) in 'Amanat' is 
a 'MunafiqV 

The Almighty Allah has called to prophet, 
Hazrat Ismail Alai Us Salam, 'Sadiqul Wa'ad, (Trust 
worthy : A person who lives by his word of honour) in 
'Soora-e-Maryam'. He (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) had given a plecge of honour to someone 
and had waited for twenty two days for him to fulfil it. 
A man's word is his bord. This is how it is a 
appreciated and honoured by Allah the Beneficent. 

A person performed ('Bai'at') the pledge of 
honour on the hands of the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) to follow in His foot 
steps. He promised to meet Him (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) at a certain place at a certain 
time but unfortunately happe led to forget it. When he 
rushed to that place thereaf er of the three days he 
found the 'Rasoolulah' (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) waiting for him tliere. He was very sorry 
and begged His pardon. 

Likewise, one day the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon iim) asked a person to 
come and see Him on a certain day and promised him 
that "when you come, whatever you need will be 
given to you." He came on that day and asked for 
eighty goats. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) gave him the desired animals and 
remarked, "You could have asked for much more." 



829 



It should however be kept in mind that the 
promise made should be tenable. The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) was very 
particular about it. Likewise to give away a thing to 
somebody and then ask for it back is like vomiting and 
eating it. 

It is 'Gunah-e-Kabira' (A great sin) to give a 
false statement. A person who gives false evidence by 
distorting facts betrays faith and acts treacherously. To 
swear wrongly on oath is also a heinous crime. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that "there is no faith in such a 
person who betrays people by giving false evidence or 
swearing in support of falsehood. Such act is like one 
of the doors of 'Nifaq' (Disunity : Disharmony) 
amongst the faithful. The 'Rizq' (Livelihood) of such a 
person always dwindles, in consequence." The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has specially admonished the traders over their practice 
to do so to sell their merchandise. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has also stated that a person who tells 
lies to make others laugh is deplorable. He repeated it 
thrice. He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
stated that "One day a person asked Me to stand up. I 
did so. Simultaneously, I saw two persons. One of 
them was standing, while the other person was sitting. 
The person who was standing was continuously 
inserting a rod in the mouth of person who was sitting; 
in such a way, that on stretching it back his mouth 
used to go haywires, badly distorted. It was a sorry 



83C 

sight. I enquired as to who they were? I was told that 
he is a liar. He will face vhis torture till the Day of 
Judgement." (It is one of the episodes narrated of 
'Meraj') . ' 

It is related that Piizrat Abdullah Bin Jarad 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) respectfully asked the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him), 
"Ya Rasoolullah (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) can a Musulman commit 'Zina' (Adultery)?" He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) replied, "It 
is possible." "And what about his telling a lie?" He 
enquired the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) said, "No" and recited the 
following verse from the Holy Qur'an. 

Z <fo C-b J^j, J Jj\ Jj&J, jJZ Oil 

( \ . o : w bdi } 

Only those who do not believe in Ayaat of 
Allah, who fabricate falsehood (16 : 105) 

Hazrat Abdullah Bin Amir (Allah be pleased 
with him) has narrated that "a small child used to go to 
play, in my neighbourhood. One day, I asked him to 
come with me and promised io give him something to 
eat. Luckily, the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) was sitting there at that time. He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) asked me 
"what do you intend to give him?" I replied, 'Dates, 
Ya Rasoolullah.' The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) observed, 'I am 
pleased. It you had not done sd, you would have been 
recorded as a liar, by the ang.sls.' He added, 'Let me 
tell you that out of the 'Gun<ih-e-Kabira' (The major 
sins), amongst the worst are Shirk', disobedience of 



831 



one's parents and added telling lies also I say, and 
uttered these words. 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
further said that 'an angel runs away a mile from a liar 
due to the bad odour coming out of his month'." 

Some people are of the opinion that if a person 
sneezes during conversation, it a sign of truth, as they 
are of the view that a person sneezes due to the angels 
and yawns on account of the 'Shaitan' i.e. the Satan. 

It is the firm belief of the sages of 'Deen' that a 
'Momin' and the following traits are poles apart. 

A. Usurping the 'Mai' of another person by 
falsehood. 

B. Swearing wrongly; Giving incorrect evidence. 

C. 'Khiyanat' (Dishonesty : Betraying Trust). 

Hazrat Maimoon Bin Shoaib (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) has stated that "once I was writing a letter. 
Suddenly I got a brain waive and thought that if 1 had 
such thing to it, its text would be brilliantly adorned 
and it would become more interesting. Then a voice 
from my conscience called me up. 'Don't do it. It is 
beautiful but not true.' I abstained from it. Suddenly I 
heard add undiscernable heralding voice. It said: 

✓ * * ■ ' 

(TV :,*»>) tj/^J 
Allah confirms the Believers with the firm 



832 



word in this life and in the Hereafter.... 

(14 : 27) 

One day Hazrat Ibne Asmak (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) told one of his friend; that "I will not get any 
'Ajr' (Reward) for not telling lies, because I feel shy 
and ashamed to do so." Dear friend. Remember that 
telling a lie is 'Haram\ as it besmirches the heart but if 
sometime one has no other alternative but to do so out 
of ('Maslihat') noble considera ions; regretting having to 
do so, considering it 'Makrooh' all the time, then it is 
not 'Haram'. It will not be 'Haram' as the heart will 
consider it 'Makrooh'. It will rot darken the heart. For 
instance, if a Mussalman is able to escape from the 
captivity and clutches of a 'Zalim' (A cruel person), it is 
not proper to divulge his whereabouts so that the 
cruelty of the tyrant person i:; not aided and assisted 
against a suffering faithful. 

The Holy Prophet (pea:e and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has allowed not to reveal the truth under 
the following extenuating circumstances, out of best 
motives at heart. 

(i) To not to divulge the 1rue picture of things to 
the enemy of Islam in a state of war. 

(ii) For the sake of reconciliation between two 
people. 

(iii) To maintain peace and harmony, it a person 
has more than one wife 

A lie is a lie but if ther 2 is a likelihood that a 
catastrophe would be precip tated if the truth is 
divulged, in that case the 'Deen' and the 'Deendar' 



833 

should be protected at the hands of their ill wishers. 
However, to resort to falsehoods and mis-statements to 
camouflage outrageous toings like ostentation, 
boastfulness, self-aggrandisement etc. is 'Haram'. 

It is the faith of every Muslim that like all evils, 
the lie is recorded. Likewise, the aforementioned 
extenuating conditions are also recorded, so that a 
query may be made from the concerned person to 
explain his conduct. If, he is able to do so satisfactorily, 
it becomes 'Mubah' (Permissible). Nevertheless to state 
a thing with impunity, believing in it strongly, without 
ascertaining the facts is erroneous. It can be very 
damaging. 

Hazrat* Mutrab (Rahmatullah Alaih) went to see 
a 'Hakim' (An official) once. He said, "You grace us 
very little. You pay a visit to us rarely. "He answered, 
"I did not raise my bearing up ever since I saw you 
last. As soon as Allah gave me the strength to do so, I 
was able to come to you again. Here, I am." The 
'Hakim' thought that he was sick, whereas he was not. 

Hazrat Shaabi (Rahmatullah Alaih) ;used to 
meet the situation more subtly. He had trained his 
'Laundi' (Female Servant) to this effect. As such, 
whenever anyone used to call him from outside, his 
maid servant used to draw a circle, put her finger in its 
midst and innocently say 'he is not here. You may try 
him in the mosque.' 

When Hazrat Ma'az (Allah be pleased with him) 
returned home from his governership of the province 
his wife asked him, "What have you brought for me?" 



Kit 

He replied, "I had a 'Nicihban' (A watch person : 
Overseen) with me, hence I could hot bring anything 
for you." For him, his 'Nigihban' was Allah while she 
thought that he was referring to Hazrat Umar (Allah be 
pleased with him) who might have someone, as such, 
with him. Soon after that wnen Hazrat Umar (Allah be 
pleased with him) came to this house Hawat Ma'az's 
wife complained to him and asked him, "Why did you 
have to send a 'Nigihban' to Hazrat Ma'az 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) when you know that he is an 
'Amanatdar' (Epitome of honesty) person?" 
Thereupon, Hazrat Umar (Allah be pleased with him) 
asked Hazrat Ma'az about it when they were alone. 
Hazrat Ma'az related the whole thing to him verbatim. 
Hazrat Umar (Allah be pleased with him) was amused 
by it and gave him something to present it^to his wife. 

Hazrat Abdullah Bin Atba (Rahmatullah Alaih) 
has related the story that "one day I went to Hazrat 
Umar Bin Abdul Aziz (Allah be pleased with him) with 
my respected father. I happened to be well-clad. As 
soon i came from there people saw me and thought 
that the 'Khalifa-e-Waqt' (The ruler of the day) had 
given me a 'Khalaat' (Reward or gift of Robe or Dress 
of honour, with or without the sword or turban). As a 
matter of fact they asked me , "Has the 'Khalifa' given 
you the 'Khalaat'?" I replied, "Allah bless him." My 
father checked me immediately and told me, Don't say 
a lie or anything which may be like it." You can see 
the difference between what is 'Mubah' and otherwise, 
as, it was also not an innocently meant humorous 
remark. No harm was done in this case but a false 
impression was carried by pec pie, for nothing. 



835 



However, there is a marked difference between 
the kind of things one may good humouredly say to 
another person, innocently. It is not accordingly 
desirable, if a person jokingly tells his friend that such 
and such woman likes you etc. 

On the nupital night of His 'Nikah' with Hazrat 
'A'isha Siddiqa (Allah be pleased with her) the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
offered a bowl of milk to the ladies of the bride. "They 
said, "We have no 'Hajat' (Craving : Desire) for it." 
The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be • 
upon him) replied, "Do not combine falsehood with 
hunger. They said, "Is such a small thing even a lie?" 
The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) replied, "Yes." 

In the same manner, our expressions of 
common day usage that 'I have told you a hundred 
times not to do so' or l I have been waiting for you for 
the last ten hours, do not signify exact numbers or 
quantity. They do not come under the purview of lies. 
Rather, they are stress clauses. 

It is a veritable saying of Hazrat Isa Alai Uas 
Salam (Holy Christ) that "to tell a lie and then have 
the audacity to say 'Allah is a witness to it* is calumny 
of the first order. There is grave punishment for it." 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that "A person who describes a 
false dream will have to tie a knot to a rye seed on the 
Day of Judgement." 



83d 



The twelveth harm lies in the 'Gheebat' 
(Backbiting). Hardly ;any person is immune to it these 
days. Those who are saved from it are fortunate by the 
Grace of Allah. It is such a h jnious crime that the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has described it as worse than 'Zina' (Adultery). 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said th<it "during 'Shab-e-Me'raj 
(Night of 'Meraj') I saw a 'Qajm' (A people) who were 
- growing at their faces with the sharp nails of their 
hands. I asked about them ar d was informed that they 
are the backbiters." 

Hazrat Sulaiman Bin Jabbir (Allah be pleased 
with him) asked the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) for some advice, one day. The 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) told him, 'Be on the lookout to do good deeds 
no matter how small they are like giving water to the 
thirsty from your bucket into their jug. Be amiable to 
your brothers in faith. Most of all, never disparage 
anyone. Backbiting is a cursed habit." 

Backbiting is such a heinous sin that Allah 
apprised Hazrat Moosa Alai Jas Salam by a 'Vahi' 
(Ordainment of Allah) that a backbiter who repents 
and says Tauba' (Repent and seek pardon of Allah) 
and dies after that, would be amongst the last person 
to be pardoned, whereas a person who dies without 
saying Tauba' will be the first to go to Hell." 

'Gheebat' means to Scy something about a 
person in his absence, which may offend him, if you 



837 

say it before him, even if it may be right. And if it is 
wrong, it is still worse and is tantamount to 'Buhtan' 
(Attributing false charges to a person) It is adding fuel 
to fire and is one of the worst calumnies in* sight. To 
cast aspersions, in any form is digging dirt, even if it be 
to belittle a person by saying something degrading 
about his height, colour some deformity or particular 
trait of the man's 'Badan' (Body), like contemptuously 
saying 'he is pitch dark' or 'he is a pygmy' etc. Some 
people snear at other people and say in absentia that 
so and so is mean, a coward, a^thief or a dishonest 
person etc. They do no good. Nor do they add 
anything to their own stature by slandering others 
behind their back by such evil talk. For example :- 

I. By saying that such and such person does not 
perform his 'Rukoo-o-Sujood' (Solemn steps in 
prayers) properly, or, 

II. By saying that such and such person does not 
recite the Holy Qur'an, properly, or, 

III. By saying that such and such person does not 
keep his clothes 'Pak' (Clean Pure : 
Unblemished). or, 

IV. By saying that such and such person sleeps too 
much or eats too much etc. # 

In short, letting down a person in absentia is an 
extremely evil trait. The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said that "if a 
person says something about a person in his absence, 
which he may resent if it is said in his presence, even if 
it is right, is 'Gheebat'." 

Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa (Allah be pleased with 



833 



her) has related that "One day she described a woman 
as 'Pasta Qad' (Short statared). The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Altah be upon him) heard it 
and said, 'A'isha, you have committed 'Gheebat', spit 
it out'. I took it literally and spat. It was black." 

The worst thing aboit 'Gheebaf (Backbiting) is 
that it brings 'Karahat' (Repulsion). Naturally, whatever 
is repulsive to hear is repulsive, as such. 

Moreover, it is not only the tongue which 
perpetrates 'Gheebat'. 'Ghee. bat' can be performed in 
many ways by making a derogatory sign with the eyes 
or by the hands. Some people do so, in writing. To 
imitate a lame person or to obliquely refer to the squint 
in a persons eye by distorting the eye lid in mimicry, 
falls in this category and is 'Haram'. Crafty insinuations 
without naming the peoplu or drawing derogatory 
caricatures of those they do not like is in the same 
vein, and 'Haram'. 

There are ways and ways of committing 
'Gheebat'. While some people do so beligerently, there 
af% others who slander others by foxiness, availing 
every opportunity to do so. For instance, the former 
may down right speak ill of <i person in his absence by 
saying that "such and such person does not say his 
prayers regularly", the later would" sedately say, 
"Thank God! I am saved from such default." 

There is another class of people. They go about 
asking others, "I believe such and such person does 
this? i have heard so. Is it coirect?" This too is a 'Jurm' 
(Crime). If that person also says, "Is that so? I did not 



839 



know it", he too would not be absolved of the 
connivance in the crime of 'Gheebat'. Such willy 
conduct becomes visibls more dangerous because of its 
two pronged disguised thrust viz of casting a slur on a 
faithful in his absence and at the same time blowing his 
own trumpet. No piety of conduct is revealed or 
concealed in such willy behaviour. 

Similarly, to speak ostensably in a sympathetic 
manner before others and say, "I was sorry to hear 
such and such thing about .so and so" is to perpetrate 
the same crime ingeniously but it can not be gain said 
that despite the fact that such a person wears an 
innocent veil over himself and says that 'I do not 
indulge in 'Gheebat' of people', does so with a vim, 
but artfully. 

One day Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq (Allah be 
pleased with him) and Hazrat Umar Farooq (Allah be 
pleased with him) were 'Hazir' (Present) before the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him). One of them inadvertently, innocently remarked 
that 'such and such person sleeps too much'. Then 
they respectfully asked Him (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) for something to eat. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
replied, "You have just eaten." They asked, "Ya 
Rasoolulah (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
what have we eaten?" The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) replied, "The flesh of 
your dead brother." One of them had made the 
remark and the other had heard it quietly. Both of 
them stood disciplined before the Holy Prophet of 
Allah (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 



840 



although they were of such exalted status. 

A man's honour is his most prized possession. 
To patter with it by word or gesture is to take a great 
liberty. Hence, if someone indulges in 'Gheebat' of 
someone, merely considering it 'Makrooh' 
(Undesirable) in the heart i> not enough. It should be 
made clear to the 'Gheebat Kunanda' (The person who 
indulges in 'Gheebat' i.e. backbiting) that you do not 
like to, hear the 'Gheebat' of anyone, specially your 
brother Muslim. The man should be firmly dealt with in 
case the miscreant is fotnd trying to malign an 
innocent person out of male fide intentions, so that the 
evil is nipped in the bad. Th s is in accordance with the 
'Hadith Mubarak' which says "if you find somebody 
committing 'Gheebat' of your brother Muslim and you 
do not come to his help, are ' careless about it and 
ignore the matter, when you are in need of help, you 
will be ignored by Allah." 

Mind you, as 'Gheebat' by tongue is 'Haram', 
likewise gheebat by heart is also 'Haram'. It means that 
just as speaking ill of a perso i in his absence is bad, to 
think ill of a person is • also 'Haram', on mere 
'Budgumani' (Conjecture : H jresay : Doubt) The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has specially emphasised that 'Budgumani' amongst 
Muslims is very dangerous. It creates disunity and 
discontentment in them whi:h mars the peace and 
tranquility between the faithful. He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has remarked that 
"The 'Khoon' (The blood : The life), the Mai (Assets : 
Money and property) oi a Mussalman and 
'Budgumani* with him is made 'Haram' by Allah, for 



841 



the faithful i.e. the faithful are honour bound to protect 
the life, property and honour of their brother Muslims 
by the order of Allah the Omnipotent." It implies that 
to nurture baseless doubts about a person in one's 
bosom, which even the heart does not accept to be 
true is Satanic, specially when two witness may not be 
present to endorse them. The Almighty Allah has 
ordained. 

If a transgressor brings you a news, make 
clear.... (49:6) 

In other words, 'Allah' has forbidden to trust a 
'Fasiq' and 'Shaitan' (The Satan) is the greatest of all 
'Fasiqs'. Therefore to lay faith in the Satan is to 
disobey the 'Hukm' of Allah You can see for yourself 
how terrible it is to do so. 

Vice versa, if the heart be inclined to think* evil 
thoughts of a good person or an 'Aadil' (A just 
person), every effort should be made to eradicate it. 
Mere heresay and propaganda against him should not 
be allowed to malign the soul. On the contrary, the 
heart should be goaded to forgather with him amiably 
and cleanse the soul. This will hurt Satan. The man 
will rise above his guiles to sow seeds of antipathy 
between brother Muslims. And in case it is necessary, 
the verity lies in giving 'Naseehat' (Advice : 
Counselling) to the errant faithful privately. It will put 
an end to the spread of the evil of 'Gheebat'. 

Admittedly, 'Gheebat' is the disease of the 
heart. Of the many ways to treat this disease, the 



842 

principal ones are to ke<ip the 'Ahaadith* on this 
subject in mind and also 1o remain vigilant that 'if I 
indulge in the 'Gheebat' ci a person, not only my 
'Naikies' (Good deeds) will be credited to that person 
but that I will also be sever ely punished for it, besides 
being looked down upon by the community over my 
evil habit of backbiting.' Most of all, he should 
remember the Qur'anic ordzr of Allah that backbiting 
of a brother Muslim is tantamount to eating the flesh of 
a dead brother. 

If a person is squint jyed or has one eye only, 
the backbiter should counl his blessings and thank 
Allah that he is not similaily afflicted and also seek 
forgiveness from Allah for having thought ill of a 
disabled person. It is not fcir to give the dog a bad 
name and hang him. Instead, the man with such 
inclination to find fault with others and forget his own, 
should try and find its causes. 

(i) The first cause is the enmity of man which 
prompts him to do so . It means to chose to go 
to Hell intentionally. The Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) has said 
that "on the Day cf Judgement Allah the 
Beneficient will reward that man who suppresses 
his anger and will tell h im to chose whichever of 
the 'Hoors'fThe Hooiies of Paradise) of the 
Paradise he likes." 

(ii) The second cause is that at times the man 
speaks ill of another person to please the 
people. He should rsalise that there is no 
greater folly than to try to please the man and 
displease Allah. 



843 



The third cause is that sometimes the man tries 
to escape by putting his blame on others. At 
times, he tries to get away from it by saying that 
'what if I have done this such and such person 
also does it'. The question is Does his 'Haram' 
become. 'Halal' because of the 'Haram' of 
another person? 

The fourth cause is that sometimes the man 
tries to propagate his piety by 'Gheebat' of 
another person. He is doubly guilty. 

The fifth cause is jealousy. A shallow person 
degrades other people due to his bitter, 
jaundiced intolerance of their endowments 
whether these are in the form of respect, 
position, wealth, 'Ilm' or some other noteworthy 
attribute which he does not possess. He keeps 
on burning in its fire. 

The sixth cause is the evil habit of humiliating 
and slandering others. Such a person becomes 
a sadist. He forgets his own follies and the 
'Azab' (Punishment) he will have to encounter 
on the Day of the Judgement, when he will be 
driven like a braying donkey into Hell to meet 
his nemesis. (Retributive Justice). 

The seventh cause is that when a 'Muttaqi' (A 
pious person) sees somebody doing something 
which is evil, he forgetfully commits 'Gheebat', 
saying 'such and such person has done this 
wrong' or something to this effect, thereby 
naming him for a felony and committing a 
felony himself. He should take him aside and 



844 



speak to him for him for his betterment. 

(viii) The eight cause is the prompt rage for Allah, 
specially over an unbelievable transgression or 
utterly odious devilry - and naming a person in 
its grip. 

•GHEEBAT (BACKBITING) UNDER 

EXTENUATING CONDITIONS 

The definition and the implication of 'Gheebat' 
has already been discussed. Following are its 
extenuations. 

(i) The going to a cour: of law (A 'Qazi') of an 
aggrieved person acainst an offender. The 
matter should however not be broached with a 
person who is not a party to it i.e. where doing 
so is of no use. A person came to Hazrat Ibne 
Sireen (Rahmatullah Alaih) and spoke of the 
atrocities being committed by Hajjaj Bin Yusuf 
on people. He said, "Just as Allah would 
punish Hajjaj Bin Yousuf for any brutal acts that 
he might have committed, Allah will also punish 
that person who commits his 'Gheebat' before 
others." 

(ii) It is in order to go to a 'Mohtasib' to check 
'Fasad' (Mischief or Disorder of a grievous 
nature : rioting etc) and 'Burai' (Prevalent evil). 

It is related that one d;»y Hazrat Umar Farooq 
(Allah be pleased with him) came across Hazrat 
Taha or Hazrat Usman (Allah be pleased with 
them) on the way and Salam to which he 



845 



received no reply. He went and spoke to 
Amirul Momineen Hazrat Abu Bakar Siddiq 
(Allah be pleased with him) about it. It was not 
'Gheebat'. 

(iii) To ask for 'Fatwa' (Decree as per 'Fiqa') also 
comes in it. There is no harm in naming the 
person. For instance a person can say that 'my 
father, brother or wife wants me to do this or I 
have this problem with any of them and get a 
'Fatwa' according to the Islamic jurisprudence. 
To quote an example, once Hazrat Hinda 
(Allah be pleased with her) came to the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) and said, "Ya Rasoolulah (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) my husband 
(Abu Sufian May Allah be pleased with him) is 
rather tight fisted with me, with the result that it 
has become very difficult for me to manage the 
home and his knowledge?" The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him), 
"There is no harm in it, provided whatever is 
spent is fairly utilised with justice." 

(iv) The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has said that whenever there is a 
danger of 'Aafat' (A calamity) or 'Museebat' 
(Misery) for the faithful because of their 
menace, the 'Fasiq's' (Depraved person of the 
worst order) 'Aib' (Shortcoming : Mischief) 
should not be concealed in the general interest 
of all." In any case, sometimes the bravado of 
such persons as a cruel king, an open 'Fasiq' 
behaving lewdly fearlessly and a 'Bidatee' are so 



848 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has clearly stated that a (Backbiter) will 
never go to 'Jaonat'. He has further remarked that "let 
me tell you who are amorgst the worst in you. They 
are the irrelevant talker - the 'Chughalkhors' who 
concoct stories and upset people. When Allah created 
the 'Jannat', He asked it :o say something. He said, 
"Indeed blessedly fortunale are those persons who 
would enter the 'Jannat'. Thereupon Allah the 
Omnipotent said, "Eight ki ids of people would not be 
able to set their foot into you viz the drunkards, the 
persistant^ adulterous people, the blabbers, cruel 
rulers, the effeminates, cold blooded persons and the 
people who break their pledge given to Me." 

It is in the 'Hadith' that once famine broke out 
in 'Bani Israel' (The Israelii es). Hazrat Moosa Alai Uas 
Salam went for 'Namaz-e-Istisqa' (special prayers said 
in congregation for rain fall) several times with his 
people but there was no rain. Thereafter Allah the 
Merciful informed him by 'Vahi' (Divine revelation : 
Divine instruction) that 'your pra y er would not be 
granted. There is a 'Chghalkhore' (A blabber) in the 
congregation. Hazrat Mocsa Alai Uas Salam humbly 
submitted that he may kindly be identified to me, so 
that we may remove him from amongst us." Allah 
said, "How do you expect Me to do that which I have 
forbidden. " Hazrat Moosa Alai Uas Salam (Prophet 
Moses) became morose and inforrrted everybody of it. 
Resultantly, everybody asked forgiveness of Allah and 
asked Him for His Mercy. Then the welcome showers 
came to the delight of all. 

There is an age old parable that a seeker of 



849 



truth of the olden days travelled for seven hundred 
miles and ultimately succeeded in finding a 'Hakim' (A 
sage) that he was looking for. He asked the following 
questions from the veritable 'Hakim' in his quest for 
knowledge. 

1. What is more 'Faragh' vastor wide than the sky? 

2. What is more onerous than earth? 

3. What is harder than stone? 

4. What is hotter than fire? 

5. What is colder than 'Zahr Meera? 

6. What is richer than an ocean? 

7. Who is meaner than a yateem? 

The 'Hakim' - the sage replied: 

1. The 'Haq' (The Divine order : The verity : The 
truth) is far more 'Faragh' (Wide : Having great 
span) tharr the sky. 

2. The 'Buhtan' (Attribution of false charges to an 
innocent person) on an innocent person is more 
onerous than earth. 

3. A kafir's heart is harder than stone. 

4. 'Hassad' (Jealousy) is hotter than an ocean. 

5. A person who does not come to the aid and 
succour of a friend in distress is more cold 
blooded than 'Zahr Meera' (Alchemic 
substance) . 

6. A contented heart is richer than an ocean. 

7. A blabber who gets exposed is meaner than a 
cad. 



8E>0 

The .order is not to say anything which may be 
pinching, in absentia of a person. 

(i) Whether it may be slander of a serious nature, 
or 

(ii) An oblique, adverse reference, or 

(iii) An innuendo, or 

(iv) An implied hint, or 

(v) Aspersion, by a gesture, or 

(vi) ' An implication conveyed by the sign of the eye, 

or 

(vii) Ill-meant persiflage, which though innocent 
looking could even verge on a dirty dig. 

I. The 'Chughalkhore' i.e. the blabber is a 'Fasiq'. 
The Allah has proclaimed not to believe him 

II. Therefore, the 'Chughalkhore' should be 
dissuaded from doing so. He should be advised 
not to indulge in this 'Gunah' (Sin), for the 
Allah has ordered to 'Nahi' (Negate : stop) the 
'Munkar' (The disallcwed). 

III. It is 'Wajib' (Valid : As per rules) to treat him as 
an enemy. 

IV. Doubts and suspicions ('Budgumani') should not 
be allowed to best in the heart against anyone. 
It is 'Haram' to do so. 

V. A Muslim should refrain from being inquisitive 
in such matters, as, 'Tajassus' (Ciriousits) of this 
kind is 'Haram'. Allah the Omnipotent has 
strictly forbidden it. 

VI. It is also imperatve that the contents of 



851 



'Chughalkhori' of a 'Chughalkhore' (A blabber : 
a wanton slanderer) should not be carried 
forward to another person. It will be adding fuel 
to fire and playing in the hands of the Satan, by 
growing seeds of discontentment and discord in 
the faithful. In short, one should not say or hear 
anything in respect to another person, which 
the man would not like to be said about him. 

One day a person indulged in 'Chughalkhori' of 
a person before Hazrat Um'ar (Allah be pleased 
with him). He told the man, "If you have said a 
lie, you are amongst those for whom Allah has 
said: 

(V. OytoJi) Jr'UjP 

If a transgressor brings you .... (49 : 6) 

Back-biter, going about with slander. 

(68 : 11) 

He added that vice versa if you have told the truth you 
have also sinned. This 'Ay at' has been ordained in the 
Holy Book for people like you. Therefore, if you are 
sorry and repent your error I am prepared to forgive 
you. He apologized, sincerely and said Taubao 
Astaghfar' (Oh Allah forgive me) . 

A person went to a 'Hakeem' (A sage : A 
doctor) and said, "that such and such person says this 
and that about you. He replied, "You have come too 
late to me and have committed three sins viz you 



8b2 



spoke ill. of a Muslim in his absence. My heart was 
serene, you have filled it with you have personified 
yoursuf as a 'Fasiq' in my eyes. You have not done 
well." 

Khalifa Sulaiman Bin Abdul Maalik 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) asked a person. "Didn't you say 
something to me just now'"' He said, "No. 1 didn't. I 
merely related what a just and trustworthy person had 
stated." Imam Zahri (Rahmatullah Alaih) happened to 
be there. He observed, "Ya Amirul Momineen! (Oh 
head leader of the faithiul) A 'Chughalkhore' can 
never be a just and dependable person." Khalifa 
Sulaiman concurred with him and said, "You are 
absolutely right." Then h<: addressed that man and 
said, "You had better leave this place and go home, 
intact. 

Hazrat Hassan Bas«ri (Rahmatullah Alaih) has 
said that "a person who spsaks ill of another person to 
you, will most likely speak ill of you, to another man. 
Hence, the safety of the nan and the 'Deen' lies in 
protecting one's self from such a nefarious person. He 
should be treated as an enemy, since, as a rule the 
principal traits of such a man are backbiting, making 
excuses, betraying the t*ust of honour, duplicity, 
jealousy, concocting false stories, creating disunity in 
people and treachery. 

According to Hezrat Ma'sab Bin Zubair 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) "To hear the 'Chughli' 
(Backbiting) is worse thar committing 'Chughalkhori' 
i.e. resorting to backbiting. The intention of the 
mischief monger is to create mischief. Hence the man 



853 



who hears him do so complaisantly aids and assists 
him in his evil designs." 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) used to repeatedly forewarn the faithful 
of the enemy within, which is the worst enemy, in fact. 
For, a 'Chughalkhore' who is actually a 'Mufsid' 
(Mischief monger) of the worst order can cause grave 
disorder in the ranks of the Mussalmans. It can lead to 
anarchy and bloodshed. 

A trader used to sell slaves. He said about one 
of them that "this fellow has no other virtue except 
that of being an instigator and mischief maker." A 
person bought him despite it considering this remark to 
be a challenge to him. He thought that he would be 
able to overcome him but the reverse happened. Soon 
after that the 'Ghulam' (The slave) told the lady of the 
house confidentially. "Do you know that my master 
does not like you. He intends to buy a beautiful 
'Laundi' (Hand-maiden). Therefore, I suggest that you 
remove some hair from his throat with a sharp knife 
when he goes to sleep. After you have shaved off 
these hair, give them to me. I will chant some mantara 
('Mantar') over them and he will fall in love with you 
madly. Thereafter, he went to his master and told him 
privily that "I wish to warn you that your wife is in love 
with somebody else. She wants to kill you. Be careful, 
when you go to sleep." That night the husband 
pretented to be asleep. To his utter disappoinf-ment 
he noticed his wife advancing towards him 
surreptitiously with a knife. He leapt at her, snatched 
the kinfe from her hand and killed her on the spot." 



854 



The fourteenth hazard lies in the ill advantage 
the 'Munaflq' like a 'Gieebat Kunanda' takes by 
instigating a person against his enemy. He knows that 
such and such person is the arch enemy of such and 
such man. He purports to be the friend of both and 
keeps on provoking each against the other, deftly. The 
result of such devilry is horrendous, resulting in bitter 
feuds and fights. Therefoie, the Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) has termed it as 
worse than 'Chughalkhori.' He (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) has said that "a person who acts 
with duplicity with the fa thful will rise up as a two- 
tongued person on the Day of Judgement, due to his 
double dealing and deceit! ulness. A person who keeps 
friendship with two, enemies of each other and rather 
than bring them together aggravates their acrimony is a 
morsel of Hell fire." 

Hazrat Ibn-e-Umar (Allah be pleased with him) 
once regretfully remarked, "What a pity that now a 
days we go the 'Uma'ra' (The rich and the powerful) 
and say such things (of flittery) which we should not. 
This was never the case in 'Ayyame Risalat' (During 
the days of the Holy Prcphet peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him). It is a kind of 'Munafaqat' 
(Treachery.)." 

• 

The fifteenth harm is inherent in falsely and 
exaggeratedly praising people. It has six consequential 
evils. Four of them pertain to the eulogist and two to 
its hearer. 

(i) Such a eulogist becomes a liar. It is in the 
'Hadith' that a person who indulges in such 



855 



empty exaggerated accolade of people will have 
his tongue stretched so long due to his 'Zuban 
Darazi' that on the day of Judgement it would 
be seen dragging on the floor between his feet 
he will find it difficult to walk due to it and will 
come a purler frequently." 

Secondly, his mean tricks are likely to be 
exposed. He is apt to suffer ignominy in 
consequence. 

The third intrinsic danger lies in the man, in the 
habit of telling tall stories, saying things which 
are not true. Once a person did the same thing 
before the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) and assigned those 
attributes to a person in his imagined praise of 
him which were extinct in him. The holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) remarked, "You seem to have twisted the 
poor fellow's neck" and added that "only those 
things should be uttered which are in your 
knowledge and you should say that this is to the 
best of my knowledge, the rest is wellknown to 
Allah." 

The fourth fallacy is that it is possible that the 
person, such a man may be praising, may 
actually be a tyrant. This is likely to be pleasing 
to the cruel person. And to please a tyrant is 
cruelty in itself. What is more, it displeases 
Allah. Resultantly, the cold blooded man 
becomes more ruthless and arrogant. 



It is related that once it came to the notice of 



836 



Hazrat Umar Farooq (Allah be pleased with him) that 
Jarood was going about telling people arrogantly that 
he was the ('Sardar') i.e. the chief of the 'Rabeea' tribe 
(which he was) . He was so unhappy with it that he hid 
in a ravine adjacent to their tribe and started whipping 
Jarood as soon as he saw him. Jarood asked Hazrat 
Umar farooq of its reason. Hazrat Umar Farooq said, 
"It had become necessary to remove 'Kibr' (Arrogance) 
from you. I have myself seen you behaving in a heady 
manner. You have a gntat responsibility on your 
shoulders. You should learn to be meek." 

The Holy Prophet ( fieace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) has also cautioned people to refrain 
from singing praises of peop le, as it is prone to have a 
damaging effect on them. There are very few 
exceptions to it, that too in case of people of such 
confirmed 'Eiman' as Hazrat Umar (Allah be pleased 
with him) and Hazrat Abu Bakar Siddiq (Allah be 
pleased with him). The Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) had said that "if Allah 
had not made me a 'Nabi' (A Prophet) he would have 
bestowed this honour on Hazrat Umar Farooq." 
Likewise the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) had statzd that "if the 'Irnan' of all 
people was placed in a balar ce and that of Hazrat Abu 
Bakar Siddiq in the other, the scale would tilt in favour 
of Hazrat Abu Bakar Siddiq (Allah be pleased with 
him)." However, to praise one's self is not 
commendable. Allah has disapproved of it. 

( rY: (^ JI ) >'£J&<jr?& 

So ascribe not purity tc yourselves.. .. 

(53 : 32) 



857 



But, if a person is made the leader and reformer of 
people and he has to discharge a great responsibility 
bestowed on him by Allah he can express it to other - 
rather he has to, as the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) did and said: 

"I am not proud about it. All esteem is for 
Allah, who has granted me this honour." 
iSunan Abu Dawud, Kitab al-Sunnah, 
Bab No. 13) 

t 

Likewise, the king of 'Misr' ; (Egypt) nominated 
Hazrat Yousuf (Peace be upon him) to take charge of 
the kingdom and its treasures and said: 

( © t - U-jo £*i 'Jg* Q'jJ y i 

Verily, this day, you are with us high in 
rank and fully trusted. (12 : 54) 

And. Hazrat Yousuf (Peace be upon him) had accepted 
this great responsibility for the sake of the betterment 
and general welfare of people. 

"The most significant is to take priority." 

In short, if ever a good man is praised, he likes 
to hear the end of it soon. He shudders, grows onore 
oneek and does not know what to do about it. 
However, he puts his guards up, knowing fully well 
that now is the time when the Satan is going to attack 
him, try and boost his ego and make him proud. He 



851? 



resists it tooth and nail and gets engrossed in the 
'Hamd' i.e. the Praise of Allah, as Allah alone is 
wrothy of all Praise. The man is nothing. He is fallible. 
The acclaim and planudts of people have no 
significance. He alone knows his inner 'Hal' (Condition 
: Verity). 

Once people praised a 'Buzurg' highly. When 
he could not stop them dohg so, he exclaimed. "Oh 
Allah! These people do not know my shortcomings. 
Only you are aware of them Have mercy on me. I am 
not worthy of these tributes.' 

Similarly, one day people gathered and started 
eulogising Hazrat Ali (Allah pleased with him). He 
raised his hands heavenwards and said, "Oh Allah, the 
Merciful! Do not take me to task for all that they are 
attributing to me. Forgive them for my over estimation. 
At the same time make me better than they think." . 

Once a person came to Hazrat Ali (Allah be 
pleased with him) and started singing his praises in a 
'Munafiqana' (Fictitious : Counterfiet : flattering) way. 
He told the flatterer, "Whatever heart about me, I am 
better than that." 

ANGER, SPITE, JEALOUSY AND THEIR 
TREATMENT 

The human wrath is a terrible thing. It's fire is 
very intense and consuming, It is a replica of hell-fire 
and Satan. It's holocaust is infernal. So much so, that 
the 'Satan' said so burning in its inferno. 



859 



You created me from fire, and You 
created him from clay. (38 : 76) 

It's flames are fiery, vibrant and out-stretching as 
against the earth which is cool and soothing. In the 
olden days people used to utilise earth to put out the 
fire Symbolically, the man's anger is more akin to the 
Satan in legend and lineage than the Adam (Prophet 
A'dam Alai Uas Salam), yet, most ironically, it is the 
man who burns himself and others in the conflagration 
of anger in this world and faces the fire and the 
brimstone in the Hereafter. 

One day Hazrat Abdullah Bin Umar (Allah be 
pleased with him) asked the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) about the factum of 
peace several times. Each time, the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) advised 
him "Control your temper. Never get beside yourself 
with rage. It spoils the 'Eiman' of man as vinegar does 
honey." 

Hazrat Isa Alai Uas Salam (The Holy Christ) 
advised the Prophet Yahyah Alai Uas Salam. "Never 
get angry." He said, "It is not possible. I do my best. 
arn human." he also told Hazrat Yahyah Alai Uas 
Salam Never accumulate 'Mai'." he said, "It is 
possible You also know that I don't." Thereupon 
Hazrat Isa Alai Uas Salamjaid, "In that case, try to 
absorb anger with a strong eHoft in you and douse its 
fire." This is precisely what Allah the Beneficient has 
said: 



860 



And restrain rage and pardon people. 

(3 : 135) 

The gist of the Holu Prophet's (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) advice is that in His 
Supreme Mercy, the Allah looks kindly on the people 
who make sacrifice for Him by controlling their anger 
with strong effort. Such persons are His righteous 
people who humbly beseech Him for His mercy on the 
slightest relaxation. Allah likes them too and forgives 
their Rag - Tag indiscretion';, if any. They are the 
people who prefer to remain tongue - tied and 
reticent. Allah rewards them with the invaluable 
treasure of 'Eiman'. 

Hazfat Fuzeel Bin Ayaz (Rahmatullah Alaih) and 
Hazrat Sufian Soori (Rahmatullah Alaih) discussed the 
matter threadbare one day ami came to the conclusion 
that there is nothing more redeeming than patience 
and fortitude in anger and self restraint and 
contentment in greed. 

Indeed, the friends of Allah who are forgiving 
by nature are very esteemed because they endure the 
onslaughts of aggravating things with fortitude. Once 
somebody was rude' to Hazret Umar Bin Abdul Aziz 
(Allah be pleased with him). Hazrat Umar kept quit but 
the man did not 'desist from saying things which were 
hurting. Thereupon Hazrat Umar addressed the 
aggressor 'Ghuroor-e-Saltanat' (Pride of Authority and 
government). I am not going to fall a prey to him by 
getting wild at you, so that I may not have to account 



861 



for retaliation in position of power, on the Day of 
Judgement." 

A prophet of the day, once told his people 
enmasse "Is there anyone amongst you who may give 
me his word of honour that he will wrap up his wrath 
for good? i promise that he will be my 'Khalifa', after 
me. He will be together with me in 'Jannat' (Paradise). 
A person accepted the challenge, lived upto it and 
became his 'Khalifa', as promised and earned the 
eminent name of 'Zulkifl'. 

Actually, Allah has created the severity and 
rigour in man as a tool against everything which is 
harmful to him. Similarly, the quality of desire has 
been produced in man so that he may be able to draw 
the useful things from life. If he can do so and is able 
to maintain an equilibrium of these attributes in him, 
he will become balanced and righteous. Vice versa, if 
he lets these traits get the better of him, he is sure to 
be ruined. Their impact on the man will be grave. His 
heart will be ablaze. The clouds of the fire will reach 
his brain and confound him. He will lose all 
discernment and will not be able to find his way. If a 
man's passage becomes so dark in life, he can not 
reach his goal. He is impeded at every step. Hence, 
the zip lies in harnessing these traits for the good of the 
'Deen' and the 'Deendar'. These forceful energies had 
better be utilised for 'Jehad', as Allah the Omnipotent 
has proclaimed in the Holy Book. 

( * : jh^JH) i Jh^p 'J&l 3 J J^ 1 

Struggle against the unbelievers and the 
hypocrites.... (66:9) 



862 



Are hard against the unbelievers. ... 

(47 : 29) 

Likewise, Allah has referred to the same 
vigorous trait and said in 'Soora-e-Fatah'. "They (The 
Sahaba-e-Karam Allah be pleased with him) are severe 
with the 'Kuffar'. It proves that the opinion of some 
people that the anger which is a form of this virile trait, 
should be eradicated root und branch by 'Riazat' 
(Rigorous undertaking and effort) is wrong. The verity 
lies in its balanced equilibrium and in streamlining it as 
a prime mover for the good of the faith and the 
faithful. 

It is argued that sex unjes and the tendency to 
react sharply in anger are inherent in man. They can 
not be uprooted altogether. Specially, the strong 
reactions in man to what he c.oes not like depend on 
many factors. 

1. The man's state of mind at that moment. For 
instance, he may not worry so much about a 
pet dog of his, if he has other stronger things in 
his mind. These may include anything trifling 
with his basic needs of food, clothing, house 
and health etc. Or, otter irritants may make 
him fly off the haidle at the slightest 
provocation. 

2. The man's antipathy to the things he resents 
may also affect him much. It is very difficult to 
encounter an enemy anc remain calm. 



863 

3 The non fulfilment of certain crazes and manias 
may make him boil inside and have a sour 
outlook on life. 

4 Ostentation, or desire for self display, pomp and 
show may embitter the man and make him 
behave nastily with his fellow beings. 

5 Some people may get upset on trifles like their 
fancy for pidgin keeping or a man may go mad 
in his craze for drinking. 

6. Some persons are quarrcl-some. Their short 
temper makes them hated by one and all. 

Under the circumstances, whereas a dedicated 
man of piety and principles may overcome the evil of 
these traits by 'Riazat' (Strenuous effort : Strong 
discipline), the fact remains that the verity lies m 
taming their undesirable ferocity and in harnessmg 
them in the right direction. So much so, that the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
• has said: 

"I also feel angry as others do." 

One day Hazrat Umroo Bin Aa's (Allah be 
pleased with him) said respectfully to the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) "Ya 
Rasoolulah (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
i always pen down your veritable words of wisdom and 
guidance. What, if you happen to say something 
angrily?" The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 



864 



Allah be upon him) replied, "I swear by Allah who has 
ordained Me as His Messenger for the 'Makhlooq', you 
may write it down even then and you will find nothing 
but the truth emerge from my lips, by the Grace of 
Allah!" 

You see! He (peace ;ind blessings of Allah be 
upon him) did not say that I do not feel anger but 
stated that it can not separate the truth from Me. 'Haq' 
and 'Insaf shall emerge regardless. 

Nevertheless, we reiterate that if the Tawheed 
(oneness : Unity) of Allah is engrained in the heart of 
a man and he gets engrossed in the pursuit of the 
'Marafat' of Allah, he gets so akin to what is the most 
esteemed in man, to the extent 'that the anger does 
not come near him, although its roots remain within 
him but they become dormant, almost dead. You may 
throw stones at them, yet they do not get annoyed. 
The good prevails, the better self of man triumphs. 
Such is the blessing of the 'Marafat' of Allah. 

In their exalted status they become so elegant in 
grace that they know that ihe man is fallible. The. 
instrument may be from the agent but the stone is not 
at fault, tt is the man who is responsible for it and to 
err is human, hence they condone him. They pray for 
him. At times, they are so absorbed in their own self 
that they even do not notice these things. 

It is related that one day a boorish abused 
Hazrat Salman Farsi (Allah b€ pleased with him). He 
told him, "It does not matter. If my sins outweigh my 
good deeds in the balance on the Day of Judgement, 



865 



in that case I am a greater sinner than you say. 
Otherwise, your calling me bad names is not going to 
make much difference." 

Likewise, when a person used opprobrious 
language against Hazrat Rabee Khasheen (Rahmatullah 
Alaih), he told the mudslinger. "There is a ravine 
between me and 'Jannat' (The paradise). At the 
moment I am busy in the process of trying to cover it. 
If I am able to make it to my destination then there is 
no harm in what you have said. Otherwise your 
bitterly abusing me is nothing compared to what I 
deserve." 

The moral of these anecdotes is that both of 
' these 'Buzurgs' were so absorbed in 'Fikre Akhirat' (In 
the worry of, fear of the 'Akhirat') that despite the 
abuses called, they were not angry. 

One day, a woman saw Hazrat Maalik Dinar 
(Rahmatullah Alaih), accosted him and called him a 
'Riakar' (An imposter : A hypocrite). "Only you seem 
to have got to know me, really." He said. 

In the same way, a person called Hazrat Abu 
Bakr Siddiq (Allah be pleased with him) a bad name. 
He said, "Whatever of my 'Hal' (Status : Condition) is 
not known to you is worse than that." 

One day a person railed at Hazrat Sha'bi 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) publicly. He told him, "If you are 
right then may Allah forgive me and if you are wrong, 
in that case I pray that He may pardon you for it." 



8(6 



These glaring examples are a living proof of the 
fact that it is possible to overcome anger. It becomes 
easy in the love of Allah and in the fear of the 
Almighty. Coming to grass roots, even if a person of 
normal moral values tries to suppress his anger for 
good manners or for the sake of 'Aqlo Sharah' i.e. 
rational etiquette and 'Shari'at', he becomes a 
commendable person. 

.Under the circumstances, it is imperative to bear 
in mind that 'Ghussa' or ;mger can lead to many a 
fight and fiasco in this world and the Hell, in the next, 
to say the least. Hence, it is equally essential to 
diagnose its causes and determine its treatment. 

I. The first cause of anger is 'Kibr' i.e. pride. An 
arrogant person loszs his temper over trifling 
things which are not according to his 
expectations, as per his pride, pomp and show. 

It's treatment lies in acting to the countrary i.e. 
in becoming meek, humble and God fearing, 
also in thanking Allah from the core of the heart 
for the bounties awarded by Him. The man 
should remember that he is a human being and 
so are those with whom he maltreats. He 
should realise that, as such, he should be kind 
to them, as Allah has given him more than 
them. Being cruel tc the poor and downtrodden 
hurts them Adah wil punish him for it. 

II. The second causu is the 'Ujab' i.e. the 
incredulity of the rr an. Such a person has set 
ideas of his own ami is generally disbelieving by 



867 



nature. 

III. The third cause is Jesting. Cutting jokes can 
cause a lot of trouble. It is better that such 
impolite attitude towards life should be avoided. 
Life is stern. Life is earnest. It's objective is the 
good 'Achier'. It is no use making somebody 
the play thing of an hour. 

IV. The fourth cause lies in the- felony of trying to 
find faults in people, in cursing and condemning 
them. It's treatment lies in remembering that 
Allah has condemned 'Aibjooi' of others. 

V. The fifth cause is the lust for worldly goods 
('Mai') and craving for showing off, holding 
pomp and show dear to heart. If you take even 
a grain of something from a miser, he is likely 
to fly into a rage as if a kingdom has been 
snatched away from him. A stingy person goes 
virtually mad if he has to give even a morsel of 
food to a hungry person. It is a very serious 
ailment. It is better for the treatment of such a 
person that he should act reverse to his avarice, 
have fear of Allah in his heart and remember 
that this life is transitory. Hence he should 
follow the dictates of the Almighty Allah, follow 
in the footsteps of the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) by pursuing the 
'Ahadith'. He should conform his conduct to the 
'Shari'at. At the same time, it is the duty of the 
'Ulema' and the 'Mohtasib' to help him divert 
his face towards the 'Qibla' and start his journey 
towards Allah, in right earnest. Obviously, if a 
'Pahlawan' (A wrestler), who has the trait of the 



86i; 

beast in him, to oveipower others, diverts his 
vigour and energies in the right direction in 
fighting the enemies of Allah, in his cause, he 
wourld be acting as the 'Ahlullah' do. Acting to 
the contrary is acting stupidly. 

Dear friend, 'Ghaiz-o-Ghazab' i.e. the beast like 
wrath can turn into dilirium tremens which can only be 
treated by the medication af 'Sheereen-e-Hilm' (the 
Sweet tasting Sauvity) and Talkhi-e-Sabr' (the sour 
dose of patience), put together. The medical 
compound (Ma'joon) of 'Ilm-o-Amal' (The embodiment 
of knowledge and approved behaviour) is it's panacea. 

The ingredients of 'Ilm' comprise 'Aayate 
Qur'ani' (Verses from the Holy Book), the 'Ahadith' 
(Sayings of the Holy Prophit (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) and the veritable stories of the 
'Buzurgane Din' who have lit the way for us by their 
luminous conduct par excellence. If you pounce upon 
a helpless weaker person than you in ungodly wrath 
and maul him due to your savage uncontrolled ego, 
you will in fact be challenging Allah and invoking his 
wrath. You will not be able to get away with making 
excuses that the resultant damage was caused by the 
•'Marzi' (will) of Allah. This would tantamount to 
interfering with His ('Raboobiyat') Omnipotence. A 
wolf is not rational but you are. Don't ascribe his traits 
to yourself or your traits to him. Don't be harsh to 
your slaves. They may have a valid excuse. In any 
case, do not forget that they are dependent upon you 
and down trodden. Nothinjj except mercy should be 
advanced to them. You are responsible for their 
welfare. Cruelty will only bring you to disrepute. 



869 

The sages have advised that when a man loses 
control over himself, he should say: 

"(I seek Allah's protection from Allah 
against the accursed Satan." 

It is in the 'Hadith'. Moreover, if the man be 
standing in such a state of anger, he should sit down. 
If he is sitting, he should lie down and try to cool 
himself down. If it fails, he f should perform 'Wuzzoo' 
(ablutions) with cold water as it is in the 'Hadith' that 
the basic cause of wrath is its fire and water 
extinguishes it. There is also a 'Rivayat' that the man in 
anger should then perform 'Sajda' on the 'Mitti' naked 
earth, touching his head with it. He should remember 
that it is 'dust unto to dust'. He is made of dust and 
has got to go to dust. He should feel ashamed of 
himself and say that 'it does not behave me to be 
angry.' 

One day Hazrat Umar (Allah be pleased with 
him) asked for some water to douche his nose with it 
as he was feeling angry and said that 'anger is due to 
the 'Shaitan' (Satan) . This is its treatment.' 

One day Hazrat Abu Zar Ghiffari (Allah be 
pleased with him) addressed a person 'Ya, Ibnul 
Hamra, in anger (implying obliquely that you are the 
son of the 'Laundi' Alhamra. She was black), thus 
trying to find a fault with him. The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) heard it 
anoVjsaid, "Oh Abu Zar, you should remember that 



870 



you are not better than any black or red person." 
Hazrat Abu Zar Ghaffari's face was mantled with 
shame. He apologized humblv. 

Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiq<i (Allah be pleased with 
her) has related that whenever she used to fool angry, 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) used to hold her by the nose and used to 
say, " 'A'isha, state this." 



It is therefore a 'Sunnaf to do so. It 
means 'Oh Allah, forgive me. Pardon my 
sins. Remove the dirt of the rage from 
me and protect me from all mischiefs 
and devious ways.' 

The 'Sharah' (Islamic jurisprudence) does not 
allow a man to indulge in 'jjheebat' for 'Gheebat' or 
abuse a person if he has abi sed him. Taazhr' i.e. the 
decree for default becomes 'Wajib' (Enforced) in such 
cases. The sensible thing is to 'drink off the anger as 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has ordered and remain quiet. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has summed up the status in these words, if worse 
comes to worst. 



" * * 




"If two persons quarrel with each 



871 



other, then the person who initiates 
the dispute will be the 'Mujrim' (The 
defaulter) but in case the victim of the 
formers abuse surpasses the limits in 
retaliation, he too will become a 
'Mujrim'." ■ . 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) saw a person scolding Hazrat Abu Bakr 
siddiq (Allah be pleased with him). He remained quiet 
but when Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq (Allah be pleased 
with him) was about to reply to him, the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) stood up. 
Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq (Allah be pleased with him) 
also stood up and requested Him to kindly remain 
seated. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) said, "Abu Bakr, when you were 
quiet, an angel was answering the offender but when 
you were about to reply to him, the Satan replaced 
him. Naturally, I can not be in his presence." 

There is also a saying of the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) that like all 
other things Allah has also created men of different 
kinds. Some people are not easily stirred. They take 
time In cooling down. While, there are some who get 
infuriated quickly. They also simmer down quickly. 
The better man amongst you is he who becomes angry 
rarely, after a long time of becomes pleased soon." 

Lucky is the person who is able to overcome 
with Ikhtiaro Riazat' (Wanton, strong effort and 
exercise) . Vice versa, if a person manages to do so out 
of meekness or under force majeure due to'ljzo 



872 



Zurroorat', there is a likelihood of the suppressed 
wrath accumulating in his 'Batin* (soul : The heart) and 
later emerging in different unenvious shapes. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
has said, "A. 'Momin' is never TCeena Parwar* i.e. 
vindictive. 'Keena* (vengefulness) is the son of wrath. It 
has eight grandsons. Each one of them is very 
dangerous for the 'Deen'. 
'< 

1. The first one is 'Hassad' (Jealousy). It pains the 
'Hasid' (The vengeful person) to see his enemy 
prosper. Vice versa ha is very pleased when his 
opponent is in distress . 

2. The second one is 'Shamtul' (Ferocious 
retaliation). In doing so he goes to such 
extremes that he displays public pleasure on the 
down fall of his enemy. 

3. The third one merely consists of giving up 
speaking to him. H<«, declines to answer the 
'Salaam' i.e. the greetings of his foe and looks 
scornfully at him. 

4. The fourth one is that he looks down upon 
him, openly. 

5. The fifth one is that he indulges in the 
backbiting of his enemy, tells lies about him and 
discloses his lewd secruts. 

5. The sixth one is that he ridicules his enemy. 

7. The seventh one is thiit he refrains from fulfilling 
his rights, severs all relations with him. He 
declines to return the loan taken from his 



873 



enemy, to him and fails to apologize to him, 
when it is due. 

8. The eighth one is that he does not hesitate to 
harm his enemy, even to inflict bodily injury on 
him. He goes to the extent of instigating others 
to perpetrate battery and mayhem on his foe. 

It is very important to remember the kindness of 
the man, in such situations. Ingratitude is very 
distressing and evil. Some person's are so selfish that 
they completely forget their benefactor and his 
beneficence and become hostile to him after he can 
serve them no more and does not suit their book. 

Once a person named 'Mustq' who was related 
to Hazrat Abu Bakar. Siddiq (Allah be pleased with 
him) resorted to falsehood about Ummul Momineen 
Hazrat Syeda Siddiqa (Allah be pleased with her) in 
'Waqiae Ufak' (The episode of 'Ufak'). Hazrat Abu 
Bakar Siddiq did not like it. He stopped his 
maintenance allowance ('Nufqa') and took an oath that 
he would never renew it. Thereupon, this 'Ayat' was 
proclaimed by Allah. 

Let not those of you who have bounty 
and plenty swear.... (24:22) 

Thereupon the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) asked Hazrat Abu 
Bakar Siddiq (Allah be pleased with him), "Won't you 



874 

like that Allah may pardon you and bless you?" 
Hazrat Abu Bakar Siddiq (Allah be pleased with him) 
said, "Ya Rasoolulah, (peace and blessing of Allah 
be upon him) I would lik<; that." Immediately after 
that he renewed his 'Nufqa'. 

'Keena' i.e. the spite keeps on burning like fire 
in the heart of man. Three things can happen. 

(i) A man can do 'Mjjahida' (Strong efforts : 
Vigorous excercise) with himself, overpower his 
vindictiveness and rather than retaliate against 
his enemy, can say to himself "on the contrary 
let me do good to him. Let one increase his 
facilities. " This is the eminent status of the 
'Siddiqeen'. 

(ii) The second stage is that of the 'Parhaizgars' 
(The faithful : The pious). If they can't do good 
to their enemy they do not do bad to him. 

(Hi) The third kind is tiat of the Tasiqs' (The 
depraved : Evil doer] and the 'Zalims' (The 
cruel and the transgressors). They try to cause 
maximum damage to the person whom they do 
not like. 

However, greatness li>s in trying to do good to 
that person who tries to do bad to you. I It pleases 
Allah highly. If one can't dc it, the next best thing to 
do is to forgive the man. The Holy Prophet (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) has said that I can 
swear to you about three things viz the 'Mai' (One's 
assets) never decreases by g ving 'Sadqa'. You should 



875 



give 'Sadqa'. Secondly, if a person forgives somebody 
Allah the Beneficient increases his honour and respect 
on the Day of the Judgement. Thirdly, a habitual 
beggar courts hardship." 

Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa (Allah be pleased with 
her) has stated that I have never seen the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) be 
unhappy with anyone who was neglectful in His (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) 4 Haq' but He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) used to be 
very particular when it came to what pertained to the 
'Haq' of Allah. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) was kindness personified, with 
everybody. He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) always thought and did what was best for others. 
She said that one day the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) held my hand and told 
me, "Try to reconcile with the person who tries to 
sever his relations with you. Try t give whatever you 
can to that person who wants to take something away 
from you with a vengeance, and forgive that person 
who commits 'Zulm' with you." 

It is related that one day the Prophet Moses i.e. 
Hazrat Moosa Alai Uas Salam begged of Allah to let 
him know which characteristic of man was the most 
veritable to Him and who was most dear to Him. Allah 
tfie Merciful replied, "He, who has the power to 
retaliate and take revenge but holds his hand from 
doing so for Allah and forgives the man for His sake." 

When the Muslims conquered the city of 
'Makkah-e-Mukkarama' under the leadership of the 



8: '6 

Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be up< 
him) and gained full control of the city, the dissent* 
and 'Kuffar' were mortally scared. They considered 
to be the dealt knell for them in lieu of their atrodtk 
However, the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
Allah be upon him) put His hand on the door of tl 
'Khana-e-Kaaba' (The venerated House of Allah) ai 
uttered these words. "Allah is one. He has no equ 
His promise has been g anted. He has accord* 
victory to His servants ir His sublime Mercy. h 
enemies have been defeated." Then he addressed 
those present and asked "what do you say now?" T 
people of Quraish said, "We expect the 'Khair' (T 
good) from you. You are in power to day." The He 
Prophet (peace and blessirgs of Allah be upon hi] 
replied, "I am saying the same thing which my broth 
Prophet Hazrat Yousaf Alai Uas Salam (Propr 
Joseph) had said when AlUih had triumphed him ov 
his brothers." 

No reproach shall be an you, this day. ... 
' (12:92) 

Thereafter the 'Rehmatul lit Alimeen' (M 
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) announc 
the message of peace and tianquality to all. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of All 
be upon him) has further i stated that "when the lo 
trumpet call will blazon abroad on the Day 
Judgement and say - 'Riiie, those who are due 
reward from Allah for having been in the habit 



877 



forgiving the faults of Allah's servants for Him, in 
mercy over them'. Many thousands of them would do 
so. Then Allah the Most merciful would order for them 
to be sent to Paradise, without ('Hisab') reckoning." 

People brought a 'Mulzam' (An accused : A 
criminal) before Khalifa Hashsham, one day. He 
started making excuses before him. The Khalifa said, 
How dare you argue with me?" 

X 1 U : J*Jt) .... 'jp '£sfaa cr^ ^ 'J* fji 

The day every soul shall come disputing 
for itself.... (16:111) 

Khalifa Hashsham allowed him to do so. 

A thief stole something belonging to Hazrat 
Abdullah Ibne Mas'ood (Allah be pleased with him). 
People started sending 'La'anat' on him i.e. started 
cursing him for it. Hazart Ibne Mas'ood (Allah be 
pleased with him) said, "Oh Allah! If the thief has done 
so in dire need I forgive him and let the thing be 
'Mubarak' (Welcome : Blessed : of happy omen and 
augury) to him. However, if he has done so in 
boldness of criminal practice, I pray that it may be his 
last crime." 

Hazrat Fazeel (Rahmatullah Alaih) has related 
that "I saw a man crying while performing Tawaf of 
'Khana-e-Ka'aba' (Circumambulation) as somebody 
had stolen some thing of his. I punished him. "You 
are crying for 'Mai'?" He said, 'No. I am not crying for 
my loss. I am crying for him, lest he should be 



878 

standing beside me on the Day of Judgement and not 
be able to explain his conduct." 

Some prisoners were produced before Khalifa 
Abdul Maalik Bin Marwan (Rahmatullah Alaih). They 
were charged with various offences. A 'Buzurg' 
happened to be sitting th«re. The Buzurg remarked, 
"Allah has granted you all you wanted. He has given 
you victory and honour. So, you have got what you 
cherished. Now you should, in turn also give what is 
dear to Allah i.e. their pardon." the Khalifa pardoned 
them all and earned their piayers also, in lieu. 

It is in the Bible that a person who prays for the 
'Maghfirat' (Forgiveness) of a cruel person and wishes 
for his reformation, defeats i he Satan." 

Kindness, forgiveness, compassion and 
generosity with others emerges from a kindred heart. 
Goodness of heart and complaisance in spirit are its 
prerequisites. The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) told Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa 
(Allah be pleased with her) Dne day. "A person who is 
blessed with a soft heart and an amiable demeanour is 
singularly fortunate. He earns the good of this world 
and the Hereafter by it." Th > Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) used to advise His wife 
Hazrat 'A'isha Siddiqa (Allah be pleased with her) to 
deal with 'Narmi' (Sauvely! with people, for, every 
thing done sauvely and courteously comes to a 
successful end. Vive versa, things are likely to go 
haywires. 



HASSAD' - JEALOUSY AND ITS DANGERS 



879 



Anger gives rise to spite and spite creates 
jealousy in man. And jealousy is lethal. So much so, 
that the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) has said "that 'Hassad' i.e. the jealousy 
usurps the 'Naikees', the good in man, the way fire 
swallows the wood." He added that everybody has 
three things; tendency to have 'Budgumani' (doubt : 
Suspicion), 'Hassad' (Jealousy) and a conceived 'Buri 
Fal' (Bad augury). When you become a prey to 'Bud 
Gumani' don't get involved in its investigation. Just 
remove the thought from your mind. Don't depend on 
bad angries. And. if 'Hassad' viz jealousy is created in 
your heart against someone, Cheek your hand and 
heart from acting against him, firmly." 

Once the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) stated that evil traits of 'Hassad' 
(Jealousy) and 'Adawat' (Enmity) have started raising 
their head in you. Many people ('Qaums') have been 
ruined by it before you. They kill the 'Eiman' and I 
swear by My Allah that the essence of Eiman lies in the 
faithful, loving each other. The secret of brotherly love 
is contained in behaving with apparent winning 
manners and affectionate way with the faithful. Say, 
'SalarrY (Convey sentiments of peace and good wishes 
to the other) to each other. There should be warmth - 
real warmth in it. 

Hazrat Moosa Alai Uas Salam (Prophet Moses) 
saw a person installed under the 'Arsh' (High 
Heavens). He was curios to know his name. He, 
humbly asked Allah, "Who is he?" The Allah did not 
tell him, his name but said, "Moosa! Let Me tell you he 
is that man who did not indulge in 'Hassad' or 



883 



'Gheebat' of anyone and regained obedient to his old 
and infirm parents." 

Hazrat Zakariyy Alai Has Salam used to tell his 
people that a 'Hassid' is thjit unfortunate person who 
spurns Allah's rewards and blessings, every time he 
gets an opportunity to refra n from his nefarious habit 
of being jealous to others." 

The Holy Prophet (p<;ace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) said the following words in one of His 
'Khutbas' (Address). "Six groups of people will be sent 
to the 'Dozakh' (The Hell) due to six kinds of sins, 
without any reckoning of their performance in the 
world. 

1. The 'Hukkam' (Officials) due to their 'Zulm' 
(Atrocities and injustice). 

2. The prejudiced due tc their malignant attitude. 

3. The rich and affluent due to their arrogance. 

4. The traders due to their dishonest dealings. 

5. ' The ignorant due to their stupidity, and 

6. The 'Ulama' due to their 'Hassad' (Here, in the 
meaning of professional jealousy). 

Hazrat Annas (Allah be pleased with him) has 
related that "one day we wore sitting in the company 
of the Holy Prophet of Allah (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) when he suddenly remarked, "A 
person is about to enter from this door who is a 
'Jannati' (A dweller of Paradise)." Soon, a person 
walked in from the door his shoes in hand, the water 
drops of 'Wuzzoo' (Ablution) dripping from his beard. 
The same thing happened the second day and also on 



881 



the third day i.e. each time the same person entered 
from that door in a similar state. Hazrat Abdullah Bin 
Amr bin Aas (Allah be pleased with him) became very 
curious went to that 'Buzurg' from the 'Ansaar' and 
said. 'I have had a quarrel with my father. I want to 
remain with you in your house for three days?" He 
agreed. Hazrat Amr watched him carefully for three 
days and nights and found him engrossed in prayers, 
rosary and the worship of Allah. Thereupon Hazrat 
Amr (Allah be pleased with him) told the Buzurg. 
"Actually, the Holy Prophet (Peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) had said this about you for three 
days continuously. I wanted to know its reason. Hence 
my request for presence here. I have not had a quarrel 
with my father." The 'Buzurg' replied. 'You have seen 
my 'Amal' (The performance), whatever it is but let me 
tell you that I have never had the 'Hassad' against 
anybody in my heart. I think it is the secret of my 
blessing.' 

Once Hazrat Aun Bin Abdullah (Rahmatullah 
Alaih) told a king. Beware of 'Takabbur'. The first sin 
ever was committed by 'Iblees' and it was 'Takkabur', 
when he disobeyed the Almighty Allah in arrogance 
and did not perform 'Sajada' before Adam Alai Uas 
Salam. It is also the cause of the Adam's (Hazrat 
Adam Alai Uas Salam) ouster from the Paradise. Also 
refrain from 'Hassad' i.e. jealousy, for 'Haabeel' was 
killed by 'Qabeel' (Leaders of two groups of people) 
due to it, in the primary case of 'Hassad' on earth 
(Soora-e-'Maida') . Also, be on guard against greed, as 
amongst the first human sins committed, it was also 
the cause of the downfall of Adam (Hazrat Adam Alai 
Uas Salam)." He added that whenever the subject of 



882 

the 'Sahaba-e-Karam' (Allah be pleased with them) or 
the veritable qualities of Allah or the stars in the galaxy 
is broached, one should remciin quiet and gloomy. 

A sage used to stand before the king daily and 
say, "Be good to the good. The. evils are already 
cursed by their evils. It is encugh recurring punishment 
for them." The king was his admirer. One day a 
'Haasid' complained to the king, committed fallacious 
'Gheebat' of him and told the king, "This sage that you 
hold in esteem so much calls you ('Bud Zuiban') an 
evil-tongued person." The king asked him to prove it. 
He said, "When he appears before you tomorrow, you 
may see it for yourself that he will have covered his 
nose with his hand so that he may not have to smell, 
the evil odour of your mouth." Thereafter the crafty 
man took the sage to his house (before his going to 
the king) and' made him <jat strong onion dishes. 
When the king called him he observed, that right 
enough he had covered his face, as fore told by the 
man. The king became convinced that the blabber was 
right. The king was good man. He used to give reward 
and 'Khalaat' to people but always tried to evode 
execution of people before him. Thereupon the king 
wrote a proclamation addressed to his 'Ghulam'. 
(Slave : Servant) who was an executioner to the effect 
that the head of the bearer of this letter should be 
chopped off and his body s:uffed with straw and fluff 
should be returned to the king for his perusal. The 
king sealed it in the envelop e and gave it to the sage 
to deliver it to the 'Ghulam'. When the Sage came out 
of the king's court, his 'Gheebat Kunnanda' (The 
blabber) met him and asked him, "What is it?" The 
sage replied, "It contains crder of Shahi Atya (The 



883 



royal reward)." The man said, "Give it to me." The 
sage gave it to him. When he took it to the 'Ghulam' 
he was shocked to learn of the kings orders. It meant 
sure death for him. He kept on pleading that these 
orders were not for him but were actually for another 
person but the executioner beheaded him and obeyed 
the king's orders. To the kings surprise the sage was 
again standing before him the next day, uttering the 
same words of advice, as usual. The king asked, 
"What happened to the letter that I gave you 
yesterday?" He said, "Such and such person took it 
from me." the king said, "But he had complained to 
me that you had said that I was 'Bud Zuban' and 
'Gunda Dihan' (A person from whose mouth foul 
words and bad odour emerges)." The sage said, "This 
is not true. I never said such a thing." Then the king 
asked him, "In that case why had you covered your 
face with your hand before me?" He replied, "It was 
because he had persuaded me to take my meal with 
him. It was full of ginger. Thereafter, I was called by 
you. I had covered my face because of you." The king 
was very pleased to hear it. He said, "I shall ever 
remember your words of wisdom. Everyday, you used 
to come here and say that the evil gets it own 
punishment. That wicked person had dug his own 
grave with his own hands." 

Somebody asked Hazrat Hassan Basri 
(Rahmatullah Alaih) . "Does a Muslim commit Hassad? 
He replied, "Have you forgotten of the sons of Hazrat 
Yaqoob Alai Uas Salam (Prophet Jacob)?" If the pain 
of the enmity of one's foe becomes overriding, the 
man commits 'Hassad'. Hazrat Abd al-Darda (Allah be 
pleased with him) used to say "That a man who keeps 



884 



on reminding himself of the inevitable death 
continuously neither remains ecstatic nor he ever 
commits crimes like 'Gheebat' Dr Hassad." 

JEALOUSY AND ITS HARMS 

The necessary off -shoot of anger is malice and 
the malice generates jealousy. The jealousy is a fatal 
thing. The Holy Prophet (pea:e and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) said: 

Three things are such which are present in 
every man, viz., suspicion jealousy and bad omen. 

He (peace and blessincs of Allah be upon him) 
prescribed their cure as under:- If you are over-come 
by suspicion, do not investigate and remove such 
thought from your heart. Do not rely upon bad omen. 
If you feel jealousy about anyone, do not act by words 
and action in aid of it. He (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) further said: 

» 

"O Muslims! Such a thing has started 
generating in you thai had become the 
cause of destruction of many nations 
before you. That thing is jealousy and 
enmity." 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 

said: 

"By the token of the Lord ol Muhammad (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him)! you will not enter 
paradise without faith and the faith depends upon 



885 

loving each other." 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 

said: 

"Should I disclose you the secret of love? Salute 
(Greet) each other, it will increase love." 

Hadrat Musa (peace of Allah be upon him) saw 
a man under the shade of the Throne. He desired for 
such a station and asked Allah: "Who is he? What is 
his name?" Allah did not disclose the name of that 
man but told about his character that he never had 
jealousy (with anyone), was not disobedient to his 
parents and, had guarded himself against back-biting. 

Hadrat Zakariyya (peace of Allah be upon him) 
said: That Allah had revealed: 

"A jealous person is enemy of My favour, angry with 
My command and does not like the distribution made 
by Me amongst My servants by My Decree." 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) who is this king of all that prophets said: 
Six groups (of people) are such who will be sent down 
into the Hell due to six sins in them without further 
accountability: 

"The rulers due to their oppression. 
The Arabs due to their prejudice. 
The rich due to their pride. 
The merchants due to their dishonesty. 
The Beduines due to their ignorance. 
The scholars due to their jealousy." 



886 



Hadrat Anas (Allah's mercy be on him) 
narrated: 

"Once we were sitting in audience of the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) and he 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) said: Now 
a man of Paradise is coming. Meanwhile an elder from 
amongst Ansar came. He had his shoes in his hands 
and water drops of wudu (ablution) were falling down 
from his beard. 

The next day the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) said the same words. 
The same gentleman again appeared. The third day 
same happened. 

Hadrat Abdullah bin 'Amr bin 'As wanted to 
know about his characters and went to him and told 
him that he had a dispute wih his father and wanted 
to stay with him for three day ;. The said man acceded 
to the request. He keenly watched (the behaviour of 
his host) for three nights and : ound that when he used 
to get up from sleep he remembered Allah. He 
disclosed to the host that he had no dispute with his 
father. As the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) had thr ee repeatedly said such 
and such thing about him ar.d he wanted to see his 
actions. The host said: This to my behaviour that you 
have seen." When I started to proceed back to my 
home he called me from behind and said: there is one 
thing more and that is that I never felt jealous seeing 
goodness of anyone else. Hj said: This is the basic 
secret. 

Hadrat *Aun bin Abdullah (Allah's mercy may 



887 



be on him) gave a piece of advice to the king. 

"Guard against pride as the first sin committed on the 
earth was caused by the Pride. 'The Iblis had not 
bowed before Adam due to pride. Be away from greed 
as it became the cause of ouster of Adam (peace of 
Allah be upon him) from Paradise. Save yourself from 
jealousy as it became the cause of first unjust bloodr 
shedding when Habil had murdered Qabil." 

When there is mention of the comparisons or the 
attributes of Allah or the stars, observe silence. Bakr 
bin Abdullah stated: 

f 

A man used to say daily standing before the 
king. "Do good with the good people as the evil doing 
is itself sufficient punishment for the evil doers. The 
said man had become very dear to the king. It 
generated jealousy to the heart of another man who 
made complaint to the king alleging that the said man 
calls the king a foul-mouthed. The king demanded 

proof. The man said that the proof is that when he will 
come in the court of the king he will be having a cloth 
on his nose to avoid bad smell. After this complaint 
that man came to the said good man and took him to 
his own house and served him with meals which had a 
soup made of plenty of garlic. Meantime the message 
of the king came and when the noble man entered the 
court of the king he put his hand before his mouth to 
avoid bad smell of garlic reaching the king. The king 
took the complaint as true. It was the habit of the king 
that he wrote no order with his own hand except that 
of precious garments and reasonably handsome prize. 
But this time the king wrote himself to one of his 



888 

Governors: "When this letter reaches you, behead the 
deliverer, put chaff in his skin and send back to me." 
The king sealed the letter and handed it over to the 
noble man. When he came out of the court, the 
jealous man saw him and asked what was in his hand. 
He told that it was granted ty the king. The jealous 
man requested him to give that letter to him. The 
noble man gave it to him. The jealous man told it to 
the Governor who opened it «md informed the jealous 
man of its contents. The jealous man requested the 
Governor to give him back the letter and also told that 
it actually related to such anc; such person, and that 
this fact may be got verified from the king. The 
Governor said: Whd can dar<: also the king to verify 
the contents of his letter. The jealous man was 
beheaded. Next day the noble man again appeared in 
the king's court and repeated the same sentence which 
was his daily routine. The king was astonished and 
inquired about the delivery p : yesterday's letter. The 
noble man disclosed that it was taken away by such 
and such man. The king said: "He had complained 
against you that you had said about me that I am of 
bad tongue and that bad c dour comes from my 
mouth." The noble man stated that he had never said 
so. The king asked: then why you had put your hand 
on your mouth. He told the whole story that it was he 
who had made me to eat garlic soup. And I had acted 
so in your court as a mark of lespect to Your Majesty. 
The king said: You used to say daily that evil of the 
evil doer is itself a sufficient punishment for him. The 
fact is that an evil doer did reach to his evil 
consequence by his own evil doing. 

Hazrat Ibn Sirin (Allah's mercy be on him) 



889 



stated: I did not have jealousy with anyone in the 
matter of this material world. The reason is that if 
anyone is a man of Paradise, the favours of Paradise 
are unparalleled by any favour of this world. And if 
anyone is man of Hell, he will burn in Fire. What is 
the use of such favour which cannot safeguard against 
fire. 

A man asked Hadrat Hasan Basil (Allah's mercy 
be on him): "can a Muslim be jealous?" He replied: 
"Have you forgotten the sons of Hadrat Yaqub (Peace 
be upon him)." If there is such a grief in the heart that 
it does not come out despite dealing, it causes no 
harm. 

Hadrat Abu al-Darda (Allah's mercy be upon 
him) says: 

"One who remembers death frequently, he neither 
feels happy nor becomes jealous." 

REALITY OF JEALOUSY 

Jealousy is defined as your dislike over the 
grant of favour to someone else and your desire that 
the said favour be snatched away from him. 

According to the prophetic tradition it is 
unlawful. Another proof of its being unlawful is that it 
proves disliking of Divine command and inner 
impurity. The reason is that the desire of snatching 
away of a favour granted to a man is nothing but 
impurity of the inner self. But if you desire that you 
should also be granted with such favour and you do 
not desire fall of such favour from other person nor 



, 89) 

you dislike such thing then it is termed as GHABTAH 
and MUNAFASAH. If it is in a religious matters it is a 
good thing. Rather it is obligatory. Allah Almighty says: 

Let the aspirers aspire for that. (83 : 26) 

At another place Allan Almighty says: - 

( Y \ : ±>l*i\) .... . j££ J, 

Race one with another in hastening 
towards Forgiveness from your Lord 
(Allah) (57:21) 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) said: 

There is no jealousy in two things. One is that 
Allah may grant knowledge and wealth to someone 
and he spends his wealth according to his knowledge. 
Second is that someone gets knowledge but he has no 
wealth and he desires that in case Allah grants him 
wealth he would also have spent it like that. Both 
these persons are equal in the entitlement of reward. If 
anyone spends his wealtn in acts of sin and 
extravagance and an other says: Had I wealth I would 
also have used it in like extravagance. Both these 
persons are equal in the entitlement of punishment of 
sin. 

Such Manafasat is also called jealousy but it has 
no abhorrence about the favour on others. Abhorrence 
is not valid in any matter ex:ept a favour that comes 



891 



to an oppression and transgressor which is the cause of 
his oppression and transgression. To which its fall is 
correct as in reality it is a desire for his transgression 
fall and end of an oppression. The sign of it is that 
when such an oppression and transgrssion repents over 
his evil-deeds, the desire of his fall must also stop. 

Another point is that where Allah grants His 
favour to someone and another desires such favour for 
him. Apparently, when he does not get it a difference 
occurs. If such difference is abhorred, then by the fall 
of favour this difference will disappear, and it will 
become easy upon the heart of that person. The 
apprehension is that disposition does not remain free 
from such desire but when he will abhorre it will 
become such that if his work comes under his control 
he will not snatch his -favour. This thing remaining in 
heart of a man, does not render him liable. 

REMEDY AGAINST JEALOUSY 

Jealousy is a disease of heart. Its cure is 
necessary both scientifically and practically. Scientific 
cure is that the jealous must understand that jealousy is 
the cause of loss to him in both the worlds and benefit 
to the person concerning whom he is jealous. 

The harm to the jealous is that he remains 
engaged in grief and torture all the time, as at every 
moment someone is being granted some favour. The 
grief in which a jealous man wants to see the others 
man entangle the jealous himself. No grief and disease 
is greater than a jealousy. How foolish it is that a maf\ 
may become a victim of grief on account of his own 



892 



enemy. No harm is caused to enemy by the jealousy 
of the jealous as a time of duration of such favour is 
found in Divine Measure which can neither be nor 
decreased. It is so because the Divine Decree is the 
cause of such favour. Some people interpret it as good 
fortune. However ail agree that there is no scope of 
change in it. This is the reason that a prophet 
complained to Allah Almghty after having been 
helpless as against a women who was in authority, on 
which the revelation came: 

"Run away from in front of her so that 
her tenure may lapse." 

The reason was that the period decreed would not be 
undone. 

A Prophet of Allah was confronted in a trial. He 
made many supplications and also wept. On that the 
revelation came from Allah "The day I had fixed 
measure of the heavens and the earth, the same was 
destined for you. Do you wsh that a new palace of 
your fortune be built?" 

If any jealous wants that due to his jealousy the 
favour of an other should come to an end, he will do 
harm to himself and will lose the favour on him. Due 
to the jealousy of disbleivers, they are deprived of the 
favour of belief as Allah Almighty says: 



893 



A group from the People of the Book 
wishes to make you go astray. ... (3 : 69) 

"Some of the people of the Book wish that alas they 
would have rendered you astray. Thus the jealousy is, 
for the time being cause of grief and punishment to the 
jealous and the loss in the hereafter is besides this. It is 
so because to be jealous is to be unhappy over the 
decree and order of the Ruler of the rulers and is to 
dislike His measure that has been fixed by the All wise 
according to His most perfect wisdom and who has not 
disclosed its secret to anyone. Thus what a misfortune 
is in beating jealous. Further there is a passion of 
unkindness towards the Muslims in doing jealousy as it 
contains ill wishing for them. Anyone who does so, is 
the companion of Iblis as he was the first ill-wisher. 
Evidently there is no misfortune greater than this. 

So far as the person who is the victim of 
jealousy, he gets the advantage in this world that what 
else he will desire than to see the jealous of him 
involved in constant grief and punishment. No 
punishment is greater than the jealousy because like 
the jealous no oppressor becomes like the oppressed. 
If the victom of jealousy receives information of the 
death of the jealous or he comes to know that he has 
been released of the punishment of jealousy, the victim 
of jealousy will become grief ed. It is so because he 
desires that he should remain a permanent victim on 
account of favour and the jealous should remain 
involved in grief. The religious advantage to the victim 
is that he is oppressed of the jealous and it is possible 
that the jealous may cause oppression both by his 
word and conduct and as a consequence of it, his 



8')4 

virtues may be transferred in the deed sheet of the 
victim and the sins of the victim are included in the 
deed sheet of the jealous. Thus the jealous intended 
the victim to be deprived cf the favour but the favour 
on the victim increased. The advantage of the 
hereafter is at least certain. And for the time being, the 
jealous is involved in griel and punishment and the 
foundation of the punishment in the hereafter is laid. 
The jealous considered that he was his own friend and 
enemy of the victim but inf set the matter is otherwise. 
He besides making himsef grieved, also made his 
enemy, like Iblis, happy. It is so because when the 
Satan saw that the jealois was not favoured with 
knowledge, piety, wealth and esteem, he apprehended 
that if he became happy witn the decree he will get the 
reward of the hereafter her ce he involved him in the 
jealousy and got him deprived of the reward of the 
hereafter. One who likes the favours of trie people of 
knowledge and piety and keeps friendship with them, 
he will be with them on the morning of the Day of 
Judgement. The elders stated that those are worthy of 
reward who are either mer of learning or seekers of 
knowledge or those who arc friends of them. A jealous 
is deprived of all the three aforesaid kinds of bliss. His 
example is like the person *vho throws a stone to kill 
his enemy but the same stane hits back on his own 
right eye which is spoiled. He becomes angry and 
throws another stones with full force but it also hits 
back to him and spoils hs second eye. He again 
throws a stone which also hits back and injures his 
head. In other words he i njures his own person by 
repeatedly throwing the stone upon his enemy and the 
enemy seeing all this goes on laughing. The same is 
the state of a jealous. The Satan mocks at him. All 



895 

these affliction are caused by the jealousy. If a jealous 
begins backbiting by his hand and tongue and starts 
telling lies and rejecting the truth, his oppression will be 
increased. Hence we have stated that whosoever has 
understood this fact that the jealousy is a fatal poison, 
if God has blessed him with reason, he shall certainly 
abandon jealousy. 

The practical cure is that one should root out all 
the causes of jealousy from within oneself with full 
exertion. Because pride, to think highly of one's 
ownself, enmity, love for wealth and esteem etc. are 
the things that become the cause of jealousy as we 
have already stated in the chapter on Anger. A man 
should extract these roots. This in fact is the purgative. 
So that there may not remain the jealousy itself. As 
and if or when this disease begins to occur, the man 
should adopt such a behaviour which is adverse to it. 
For example if the jealousy* makes him inclined to 
blame others, he should praise others. If the jealousy 
excites upon pride, he should adopt humility. If it 
inclines to struggle to end the favour on another and 
teaches hostility, he should extend the hand of 
friendship instead of it. As there is no treatment better 
than this. He should praise him secretly and present 
his conduct in a beautiful manner. When he will hear 
of it he will certainly be happy and his reflection will 
come on you. And your heart will be happy with such 
reflection and the very root of enmity will be cut off. 
As Allah Almighty says: 



4« j i£; rill ^ -J\j yi. 



836 



The one between whom and thee there is 
enmity, shall be as if he was- a bosom 
friend. (41 : 34) 

At this situation the Satan excites 
whispering) that if you wll adopt humility anc 
praise him he will consider you a disgraced pe 
Now it is upon you to opt becoming an obe 
bondman of Allah or that o : the Satan. Remembe 
treatment is very useful aid advantageous but 
bitter (in taste). Man cannot observe patience ov 
except by the power of knowledge. Thus whe 
knows that his salvation in both the worli 
dependent upon such behaviour and his destri 
lies in doing jealousy, it will be easier for him t 
upon accordingly. So far as the medicine is conce 
of course, it is bitter and during disease one h 
bear the bitterness on the hope of health, othe 
the disease will becomefthe cause of destruction 
the grief will increase unnecessarily. 

SECTION 

If you will exert extensively then the 
probable hope that you will be able to know 
distinguesh between the one who teases you an 
one who is friendly towards you. Then it will n 
equal to you the favour and the curse. Rather yo 
hate the favour of your eneriy as per your dispos 
You are not responsible to change your dispositi< 
it is not within your power You are responsibl 
two things. One is that you should not expres 
natural hate by your word ard conduct and the sc 
is that you should abhor it intellectually and ref 
sincerely. It should be your desire that such art 



897 

should go off. When you will do so you will be 
released of the evil effect of the jealousy. But if you 
do'not express this hate by your word and conduct 
and also do not consider this attribute an evil in your 
heart, then according to some 'Ulama you will not be 
accountable but the correct verdict is that you will be 
accountable. The reason is that the jealousy is unlawful 
and this is the job of the heart and not of the body. A 
person who desires grief for any Muslim and dislikes 
happiness for him, shall certainly be accountable 
However if you dislike it then you will be released of 
the evil consequence of jealousy but the total salvation 
will be for him who is dominated by the oneness of 
Allah and does not consider anyone his friend or foe. 
Rather he considers all things as the servants of Allah 
and sees them with the same eye. Such a state is 
gifted rarely coming of a flash light for a while and 
then its disappearance. 



CHAPTER NO. 5 

THE CURE OF THE LOVE OF WORLD AND 
EXPLANATION OF THE STATEMENTTHATTHE 
LOVE OF THE WORLD IS REAL ROOT OF ALL 



O My Dear! remember that the world is the 
icret of all secret. What can be more abhorrent than 
e thing which is the enemy of Allah and his friends 
id even his enemies. So far as the enmity with Allah 
concerned it is clear that it attacks on his servants in 
e darkness of night. So that they may not reach their 



898 

Lord. So far as its enmity with Allah's friends is 
concerned it appears before them and dacorates itself 
in a manner that they may tolerate the bitterness of 
passions. So far as its enmity with the enemies of Allah 
is concerned it entangles them deceitfully and when 
they cover the distances of lcve it, runs away and goes 
towards their enemies. It behaves like a wicked woman 
changing loyalties. 

Thus the man suffers grief on account of it and 
some times remains perturoed in loneliness in this 
world. So far as the hereafter is concerned their the 
anger and punishment is ceriain. No one can get rid of 
the entanglement of the wo -Id except the person who 
identifies the world and its affliction duly and takes 
such prevention against it as he takes against the 
socers. It is so because the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) said: "Prevent yourself 
against the world as its scccery is greater than the 
Harut and Marut. 

We have stated the reality of the world and its 
harms and deceptions in th z beginning of the book in 
the third chapter. Here we shall mention only those 
traditions which are related 10 its condemnation. It is so 
because there are many verses on this subject in the 
Holy Qur'an and other books. Further the object of 
sending the Prophets and Messengers is to call the 
people from this world towards the hereafter and to tell 
them the harms and the afflictions of the world and to 
save the people from them. 

THE TRADITIONS IN CONDEMNATION OF THE 
WORLD. 



899 



One day the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) passed by a dead goat and said: 
"Look how disgraced is this dead animal that no one is 
prepared to even see towards it. By the token of Allah 
in whose hand is the life of Muhammad (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him), the world is more 
disgraced in the sight of Allah than it. Had it been 
equal to the value of a wing of mosquito in the sight of 
Allah, no disbeliever would have been allowed to drink 
a handful of water." 

^He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "The world is cursed and whatever is in it is also 
cursed. However that which is for the sake of Allah is 
not cursed." 

And he (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) said, "The friendship of world is the chief of all 
sins." 

And he (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) said, "One who loves the world harms the 
hereafter and one who loves the hereafter, harms the 
world." 

Thus a thing which is mortal should be left and 
the thing which is perpetual should be adopted. 

Hadrat Zayd bin Arqam (Allah be pleased with 
him) said, "I was in the company of Amir-al-Mu'min 
Hadrat Abu Bakr Siddiq (Allah be pleased with him) 
that people came to him with water mixed with honey. 
He took the glass near his lips and then returned the 
glass and wept so severely that we all also wept. He 
stopped weeping for a while but more of us could dare 



900 



ask the cause for such weepiig. When he stopped 
weeping fully someone asked, "0 Caliph of the 
Messenger of Allah what wus the cause of this 
weeping?" He said, "Once 1 waji present in the court of 
the Messenger of Allah, I saw that he (peace be upon 
him) was removing something away with his hand 
while apparently nothing was visible. I submitted, O! 
Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) what is that? 
He (peace be upon him) said, "It is the world that 
offers itself to me and I am avoiding it. It happened 
repeatedly that it said, "You have avoided yourself but 
those coming afterwards world aot be able to avoid me 
from them." Hazrat Abu Bakr Siddiq said, "I fear that 
not it is attacking me while 1 have heard from the 
Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him), "Allah Almighty his not created anything 
which is more hostile than the world. Since after Allah 
Almighty created the world, He has not seen towards 
it." 

And he (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) said, "The world is the wealth of the destroyed 
and wretched ones. It is collected by those who are 
deprived of intellect. Those who create enmity with the 
people in order to get it ere the ones who lack 
knowledge. Regarding it only such person becomes 
jealous who lacks the favour of understanding. The 
seeker of it is the one who is deprived of the wealth of 
the sensitude. 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "One who gets up in th<t morning and attends to 
the world is not from amongs: the special favourites of 
Allah because it that is the world is the fuel of hell and 



901 



such person shall remain confronted with four things. 
Firstly, the grief; Secondly, the engagement due to 
which he was engaged in it. Thirdly, such poverty that 

will never turn into richness. Fourthly, such hope that 
has no limit. 

Hazrat Abu Huraira (Allah be pleased with him) 
reported that one day the Messenger of Allah (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) said, "Do you 
want that I should show you the world in its orginal 
form." Then he got hold of my hand and took me to a 
place where skulls of the dead human beings and 
animals and the garbage were lying. He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be updn him) said, "These skulls 
were also filled with lust and desires like your skulls. 
Today these are such bones that have no flesh on 
them and they would also soon turn into dust. And 
this garbage are those multiple kinds of food which 
were brought with much hardship and now have been 
thrown away that all people hate them and these rags 
were those prideful garments that use to wave in the 
air and these bones are of the animals and rides on 
which people used to ride for walk and journey. So 
this in the reality of the world. Now anyone who wants 
to weep upon it ask him to weep as this is the place of 
weeping. Hadrat Abu Huraira (Allah be pleased with 
him) reports that all those persons present there started 
weeping. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) said, "Since its birth the world is hanging 
between the heaven and the earth. Allah Almighty has 
not put a glance on it. On the Day of Judgement it will 
submit, who was the lowest amongst your servants 



902 

entrust me to him. Allah j\lmighty will say, "0 
worthless! be silent, I had not liked it to give to you to 
anyone in the world, how can '.. like to do so today." 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "On the Day of Resurrection some people whose 
deed sheets will be equal to th z Tahama Mountain but 
they will be put into the Hell." People submitted, "O 
Messenger Allah! Will they be the Ghazis? He (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) said: yes. 

They further asked: V/ere they observers of 
fasts? He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "Yes". They will ask, "Will they be those who 
remained awake throughout the night in prayers. He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) said, 

"Yes". But they were those who had 
fallen upon the world." 

One day he (peace ar d blessings of Allah be 
upon him) came out and asked his companions (Allah 
be pleased with all of them), "Who amongst you is 
such who is blind and wishes :hat Allah Almighty may 
grant him eye sight. You sho aid understand that one 
who has inclination towards th e world and longs for it 
too much, Allah Almighty mikes him blind of heart 
and the abstinate who has <i little hope grants him 
much knowledge without learning it from anyone, and 
blesses him with guidance without anyone guiding him. 

One day he (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) came out while Abu Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah 
(Allah be pleased with him) h<id sent some goods from 



903 



Bahrain. When the Ansar got this information there 
became much rush as the time of Haj. When he 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) completed 
his prayer with salutation, all were standing before him. 
The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) said, "Perhaps you have got the 
information that goods have come." They submitted 
yes. He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said: Glad tidings be to you that in future there will be 
such affaris that will give you happiness. I do not fear 
of your poverty but I fear that Allah will grant you 
much worldly goods as were granted to those before 
you, and then you will be disputing as the past people 
had done and will be destroyed as they had been 
destroyed. 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "Don't be engaged in remembrance of the world 
in any manner." 

When he (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) has forbidden the remembrance of the world then 
how more is forbidden the love and demand of the 
world. 

Anas (Allah be pleased with him) said that he 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) had a she- 
camel by the name of Adba which ran faster than all 
the camels. One day a Beduin brought a camel and 
made him to run with her. Bychance the said camel 
took the lead on which the believers felt sorry. On that 
he (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) said, "It 
is incumbant upon Allah Almighty to disgrace a worldly 
thing which He graces." He (peace and blessings of 



904 



Allah be upon him) said, 'Thereafter the world will 
become attentive towards you and will eat up your 
faith as the the fire eats up the wood. 

Hadrat 'Isa (peace be upon him) said: "Don't 
make the world your Lord is that it may not make 
you its servant. Keep the treasure in a manner that 
there would be no fear of its destruction, and keep it 
with such a person who does not waste it, as the 
treasure of world is not free from affliction. The 
treasure reserved for Allah will remain safe. 

He further said: The world and the Hereafter 
are opposed to each other. The more you will make 
one pleased the more the othzr will be displeased. 

Hadrat 'Isa (peace be upon him) said to his 
Hawaris: (disciples) "I have put the world to dust 
before you. You should not click to it again. It is an 
impurity. In it is committed dsobedience of Allah. It is 
such an impurity that without leaving it one cannot 
reach the Hereafter. You shculd go out of the world. 
Do not waste your time in its population. Bear it in 
you minds that the love and desire of world is the root 
cause of all the sins. It's fruit i:> grief and labour. 

He (peace be upon hin) said: As fire and water 
do not co-exist, so the lov<! of this world and the 
Hereafter do not co-exist in a single heart. 

Once people asked H<idrat 'Isa (peace of Allah 
be upon him) as to what was the wrong if he got 
constructed a house for him. He replied, "For me the 
old house is of others are sufficient." 



905 



One day Hadrat Isa (peace of Allah be upon 
him) was under heavy rain and thunder blast and 
lightening and he rushed in search of a place of refuge 
till he reached a tent. He found a woman in it and he 
ran further and found a cave but in it was a lion. He 
submitted, "O Allah! You have made a refuge for 
everyone, where is my abode?" The revelation came, 
'Your resting place is the house of My Mercy, you will 
have one hundred Horas in Paradise as your spouse 
whom I have created with my own blessed hand. The 
night of your honey-moon will be of four thousand 
years duration and every day will be equal to several 
ages of this world. I will get it announced by the 
announcer that all the abstinate of the world should 
join the ceremoney of the marriage of Hadrat Isa 
(peace of Allah be upon him). Hence they all will join. 

Once Hadrat Isa (peace of Allah be upon him) 
passed by a city along with his hawaris (disciples). 
There were dead bodies lying on the whole way. He 
said, "All these are victim of wrath of Allah otherwise 
they would have been under the earth." The hawwaris 
submitted that they wanted to knows the reason for it. 
He went on a hill on that night and pronounced, "O 
people of the city!" A person replied, "O Ruhullah! I 
am present." He asked, "What was the matter." A 
voice came, "We were quite alright in the night but in 
the morning found ourselves confined in the hell." He 
asked, "Why?". He submitted, "We used to love the 
world and to obey the professional criminals." He 
asked, "How did you love the world?" He submitted, 
"As a son loves his mother. When the world came to 
us we used to become happy and when it departed 
from us, we used to become greived." 



906 



He asked, "Why all of you have answered?" He 
submitted, "In the mouth of <iach of them is a reign of 
fire." 

He asked, "How could you be able to answer?" 

He submitted, "I was not like them but I was 
present in the company of them when the punishment 
approached. Now I am at th<t brink of hell and do not 
know as to whether I will get salvation or not?" 

Hadrat 'Isa (peace bv. upon him) said, "It is 
better to contend upon a barlsy loaf, saltish water, rugs 
dress and uneven bed if the peace of both the worlds 
be .available in doing so." H z said, "The real thing is 
the peace of faith. With it be content with a little 
quantity of world as others took the faith in a little 
quantity and took care of the peace of the world." He 
said, "Mean people seek the world for the sake of 
reward. Had they withdrawn themselves from the 
world they would have got m jch more reward." 

One day Hadrat Sulairtian (peace be upon him) 
was riding upon his throne aongwith the animals, the 
Jinns and the other creaton which were in his 
audience and he passad by a worshipper from amongst 
Bani Israel who submitted, '0 son of David, Allah 
Almighty has granted you a big empire." He (peace be 
upon him) said, "A Tasbih (Hymn of Allah) in the 
deed sheet of a Muslim is be ler than this empire that 
has been granted to me because the empire will perish 
while the said Tasbih will subs st." 



jir i* j> l<: ! \s J> 



907 



After thirty years this meaning became 
established for Khaqani that to be with 
Allah for a moment is better than the 
Kindom of Solomon. 

It is in the tradition that when Hadrat Adam ate 
the prohibited corn, he felt the call of nature and was 
in search of a place to ease himself. Allah Almighty 
sent an Angel to him who asked him, what are you 
searching for?" He said, "I want to ease myself from 
the burden in my belly." The angel said, "Except this 
corn, no other food of Paradise has such effect. You 
can't ease yourself of it under the throne, the chair, 
the rivers or trees of Paradise, hence go to the world 
which is the place of impurities." 

It is in the tradition that Hadrat Jibra'il (peace be 
upon him) asked Hadrat Nuh (peace be upon him), 
"You have been blessed with so long a life, how did 
you find the world?" He replied, "Like the house that 
has two gates, one to enter and the other to exit." 

People asked Hadrat 'Isa (peace be upon him) 
to tell some such thing whereby Allah Almighty may 
take them as His favourites." He replied, "Make the 
world your enemy, Allah will make you his favourite." 

Although there are many traditions but we 
consider the above as sufficient for the present subject. 

We present a few statements of the companions 
and the elders of the past. Hadrat 'Ali (Allah be 
pleased with him) said: Whosoever did the following 
acts, he left no stone unturned to find the Paradise 



X 903 
and to guard against the Heil:- 



(i) Who recognised Allah and obeyed him. 

(ii) Who understood the Satan and opposed him. 
(Hi) Who identified the truth and firmly held it. 

(iv) Who understood the falsehood and withdrew 
himself from it. 

(v) Who recognised the v/orld and abondoned it. 

(vi) Who recognised the Hereafter and engaged 
himself in search of it." 

A wise? man, said whatever Allah grants you in 
the world, he would have granted it to someone 
before you and will grant someone after you. Hence 
what is the use of engaging your heart in such a thing. 
You have no share in the world except the meals of 
day and night, hence for such a thing do not destroy 
yourself and observe such a fast in the world which has 
its break into the hereafter, because the asset of the 
world is desire and lust and its fruit is Hawiya, a place 
in hell. 

A person asked Abu Hazim (Allah be pleased 
with him), "The world is too dear to me, what method 
should I adopt to remove it out from my heart?" He 
replied, "Do not eat anything except the lawful. Do 
spend on valid needs as the friendship of such a little 
quantity will not cause you any harm." He gave this 
advice for the reason to make him understand that by 
doing so the world will autc matically go off from his 
heart and will appear bad to his heart. 

Hadrat Yahya bin Muaz (Allah be pleased with 
him) said, "The world is th<; shop of Satan. Do not 



909 

take anything from his shop, otherwise he will run after 
you for nothing." 

Hadrat Fudayl (peace of be upon him) said, "If 
the world would have been of gold but mortal and the 
hereafter would have been of earth but permanent 
then according to reason, it was necessary to prefer the 
permanent over the non-permanent. Abu Hazim (Allah 
be pleased with him) said, "Avoid the world as I have 
heard whosoever will consider, the world as great and 
favourite, he will be made to stop on the Day of 
Judgement and it will be announced over his head that 
it is tha person who considered such thing great, which 
Allah Almighty considered of no significance." 

Hadrat Ibn-i-Mas'ud (Allah be pleased with him) 
said, "Whosoever is in this world is a guest and the 
luggage with him is hired one. The guest is to go back 

and ultimately the hired thing is to be returned to the 
owner." 

Hadrat Luqman (peace of Allah be upon him) 
had advised his son, "Sell the world for hereafter so 
that you may get benefit of both. If you will sell the 
hereafter for the world, you will bear loss of both." 

Hadrat Abu Amanat Bahili (Allah be pleased 
with him) said, "When Allah Almighty sent the 
Messenger of Allah (peace and blesssings of Allah be 
upon him) towards the creation, a band of Satans 
went to Iblis and told him that Allah Almighty has sent 
such a Messe|ger and what should we do?" 

Iblis asked, "Do the people love the world?" 



910 



They replied, "Yes". On thzit Iblis said, "Then there is 
no need to worry if they did not worship the statues. I 
will abet them to bargain upon the unjust and 
whatever they save that should also be by unjust way, 
and this is the root of all mis:hief and disorder." 

Hadrat Fudayl (Allah be pleased with him) said, 
"If Allah Almighty grants me ans, I will avoid it as you 
avoid a dead animal. 

Hadrat Abu Ubaydah bin Al-Jarrah (Allah be 
pleased with him) was the Governor of Syria. When 
Amir-al-Mu'minin Hadrat Umar Farooq A'zam (Allah 
be pleased with him) reached there he found that there 
was nothing except a swerd, a shield and a rehl 
( ). He asked, "You do not even possess the 
necessary articles in your house." 

He replied, "The place where I have to go (i.e. 
the grave) these things are sufficient." Hadrat Hasan 
Basari (Allah be pleased with him) wrote a letter to 
Hadrat Umer bin Abdul Aziz (Allah be plesed with both 
of them), "Has that day epproached in which that 
person will die whose death s written as the last death. 
The Capliph replied that day is as if approached when 
you will say as if the world had not come." Some elder 
has stated, "It is strange as to how a person feels 
happy who knows that the death is a truth: and it is 
strange as to how a person laughs who knows that the 
hell is a truth; and it is strange as to how a person 
engages his heart with the world who sees that the 
world does not stay with anyone and it is strange as to 
how a person engages in the world whp knows that 
the Measure and the Decree are true." 



911 



Hadrat Daud Tai (Allah be pleased with him) 
said, "A man daily defers to repent (over sins) and to 
obey the commandments . (of Allah) although 
promptness is necessary in their performance and he 
abandons the truth considering it an act of futility so 
that its benefit may reach to others although its 
adoption is necessary." 

Hadrat Abu Hazim (Allah be pleased with him) 
said, "There is nothing in the world that may be the 
cause of happiness nor anything that may be the cause 
of grief. The pure happiness has not been created in 
the world by Allah Almighty. It will be available only in 
the hereafter." 

Hadrat Hasan Basri (Allah be pleased with him) 
said, " One who leaves the world, he is worried with 
three longings at the time of his death, viz 

(1) That which he had collected, he could not eat 
it fully. 

(2) The hopes he had could not be fulfilled. 

(3) The preparation for the hereafter could not be 
made by him as was due. 

Hadrat Muhammad bin al-Munkadir (Allah be 
pleased with him) said, "If a man keeps fast daily for 
the whole of his life, stands at the nights in prayer, 
performs hajj and jihad, and avoids all unlawful things 
but considers the world as a big thing, it will be said 
about him on the Day of Judgement that it is that 
person who believed such thing big which Allah had 
declared insignificant, so what will be the state of affairs 
of such a person. Each one of us is such that his sins 



912 



are much more while he has been indolent in the 
performance of his duties." 

"I am astonished as to what will be our end." 

Elders have said that the world is a deserted inn 
and the heart of such a person is more deserted than 
it, who is engaged in seeking the world while the 
Paradise is a populated one and the heart of such 
person is more populated than it who is busy in 
seeking it. Hadrat Ibrahim bin Adham (Allah be 
pleased with him) asked a person, "Do you love 
Dirham in sleep or a Dinar while awake?" He 
submitted, "I love Dinar while I am awake." He said, 
"You are telling a lie as the world itself is a dream 
while the hereafter is like the awakening and you love 
that which is in the world." 

'Hadrat Yahya bin M'uaz (Allzh be pleased with him) 
said, "A wise man is he who performs three acts: 

(i) He withdraws from the world before the world 
itself withdraws from hint; 

(ii) He constructs his grave before he goes into it; 
and 

(iii) He provides such providence with which Allah 
is pleased before being blessed with the sight of 
Allah. 

He also stated that the world is so much 
doomed that longing for it mcikes a man unattentive 
towards Allah then consider as to what will be the 
abode of a person who gets the world? 



913 



Hadrat Bakr bin Abdullah (Allah be pleased 
with him) said, "One who wants to combine the 
worldliness and shuns from the world, he is like a fool 
who wants to extinguish the fire and at the same time 
puts into it dry wood-sticks." 

Hadrat Ali (Allah be pleased with him) said, 
"World is the name of six things: 

(1) Food; 

(2) Drink; 

(3) Smelling; 

(5) Riding; and 

(6) Marriage 

In food, the best is honey which extracts from 
the mouth of a fly. The best of the drinks is the water 
in respect of which all the world is equal. In dress the 
best is silk which is the excretion of an insect. The best 
of the scents is the musk which is the blood of dear. 
The best of the ride is the horse but while riding on its 
back killing is done. The best of the lust is the desire of 
a woman and the consequence of it is that the private 
parents join. The best of the women is the face which 

she decorates while you seek that which is the worst 
(i.e. the private part)." 

Hadrat 'Umar 'bin 'Abdul 'Aziz (Allah's mercy be 
upon him), "Oh Muslims! Allah Almighty has created 
you. If you will not believe in Him, you will become 
the infidels and if after believing in Him you consider it 
an easy job, then you are a fool. Allah Almighty has 
created you to live for ever but He will take you from 
one inn Into the other inn. 



916 

(t>«t • : CPjJl) 

And forbade the soul from lust . the 
Garden shall be the reluge. (79 : 40,41) 
At another place, Allah Almighty has combined 
the world in five things. Allah Almighty says: 

That the present life is but a sport arid a 
diversion, an adornment and a cause for 
boasting among you, and a rivalry in 
wealth and children. ... ( 57 • 

The things in whi:h these five have been 
combined are mentioned in sura Al'-i-Imran. 

( > t : 0> J') *>uh 
Beautified for men is the love of things 
they covet; women, children, much of 
gold and silver (we«ilthj. branded beautiful 
horses, cattle and well-tilled land. This is 
the pleasure of the present world's life; but 
Allah has the exc silent' return (Paradise 
with flowing rivers <;tc.) with him. (3 : 14) 
* Amongst all these things that which is for the 
hereafter is considered as the hereafter. To collect the 
worldly things beyond the need is not from the 
hereafter. Rather it shou d be stated that the world has 



917 



three stages viz, to have food, drink and shelter 
according to need. Whatever is beyond that it is, 
decoration and luxury. One who became content to 
the limit of need, he goes straight to the Paradise and 
one. who exceeds the said limit, he will render himself 
the fuel of the Hell. One who reduces even the 
extreme needs, he is not out of danger because the 
need has two aspects, one near to the necessity and 
the other near to the luxury. In between these two, 
there are two more banks which can be attained by 
struggle. There is possibility that a man may not be in 
want of a thing and he considers it as a want and 
becomes a prey of danger on the Day of Judgement. 
Hence the people of care have contended themselves 
on need. In this contentment Hadrat Awais Qarni 
(Allah be pleased with him) is the chief and the leader 
of all the people as he had abstained himself from the 
world to such an extent that people used to call him 
mad. They did not see his face for a year or two 
years. He used to go out with the call of Fajr prayer 
and returned after the 'Isha prayer. He picked the date 
seeds from the 'way and ate them. If the date was 
available according to his need well and good 
otherwise he used to break his fast with the date seeds. 
He picked the rugs, cleaned them and made his 
garment with them. The boys used to throw stones on 
him considering him a mad person and he used to ask 
them to stone him with small stones so that his wudu 
may not break (due to the oozing of the blood) and he 
may not be able to offer his prayer. This was the cause 
that Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) used to praise him without having seen 
him and had made a strong direction ( ) to Hadrat 
'Umar (Allah be pleased with him) regarding him. 



918 

When Amir al-Mu'minin was on the pulpit he saw 
towards the people of Iraq and directed that all Iraqis 
should stand up and all Kufis sit down. Then he said 
that those who were not the residents of Qarn should 
also sit down. One man left standing. He asked him, 
"Are you resident of Qarn?" He submitted, "Yes". He 

asked, "Do you know Awai» Qarni?" He said: Yes, I 
know him. He is so insignificant a person that no one 
likes to talk to him. No one from amongst us is more 
foolish, mad, destitute and deficient than him." 

Hadrat Umar heard ihese words and wept and 
said: I am in search of him as I have heard the 
Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) saying: People equal in number to the 
number of the Tribes of Rabi'ah and Mudar will enter 
Paradise on account of his intercession. Both these 
tribes were much popular of the density of their 
population. 

Hadrat Haram Iba Habban (Ra,hmatullah 'Alaih) 
said: I heard this and went to Kufa and searched for 
him. I found him at the bank of River Euphrates 
washing his clothes and performing his ablution. As I 
had heard his praise I went forward and greeted him 
with salutation. He reciprocated and saw towards me. I 
wanted to hold his hand but it was not possible. I said: 

"Allah's Mercy be on thee Awais! 
and may He forgi/e thee." 

I wept on his poveity and destituteness. He also 



919 



wept, and said: 

"May you remain happy by the grace of 
Allah, O Haram bin Habban. My brother, 
How are you?" 

I asked him how could he know my name and 
my father's name. He replied, 

(T : fiy^l\) 'J^\ j^til 'J$ 

I have been informed by this All-Wise, the 
All-Knowing. (66 : 3) 

My spirit indentified your spirit as the spirits of 
Muslims have link's with one another. 

I requested him to narrate some tradition of the 
Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) so that it may remain a piece of his 
remembrance. 

He replied: "May all that I have be sacrificed on 
the Prophet of Allah (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him). I did not have the opportunity to kiss his 
sacred feet i.e. (be in his august service). I have heard 
his sayings from others. I do not want to become a 
transmitter, nor a traditionist, nor a Mufti nor I am 
fond of being called a Wa'iz (sermon deliverer) . 

My hobby is such that I can't engage myself in 
these engagements." 



92(1 

I asked him to recite something from the Holy 
Qur'art, and also requested to kindly pray for me and 
make some advice to me, as I loved him the most. On 
that he held my hand, recited Ta'awwuz and started 
weeping and then said" My Lord says like this and His 
speech is all true and then lecited the following verses 
(of surah akDukh khan) : 

Jy J-" 3 ' 

We did not create the heavens and the 
earth" and what between them is, while 
playing. We did not create them except on 
truth, but most of tfiem do not know. 
Surely the Day of Decision is their 
appointed time, all together, the day when 
a friend shall not aval a friend in the least, 
nor shall they be help, except him on 
whom Allah has mercy; He is the Mighty, 
the Merciful. (44 : 38,42) 

After reciting these verses of the Holy Qur'an he 
cried so loudly that I tock him as having lost his 
senses, but he said: "O Habban! Your father died you 
will also soon die, and then will enter Paradise or 
Hell." 

Your grandfather Hzidrat Adam (peace of Allah 
be upon him) departed from this world. Hadrat 
Hawwa (peace of Allah be upon her) died. Hadrat 



921 



Ibrahim Khalilullah (peace of Allah be upon him) 
Hadrat Musa Kalimullah (peace of Allah be upon him), 
Hadrat Dawud Khalifatullah (peace of Allah be upon 
him) and Hadrat Muhammad Rasulullah (peace of 
Allah be upon him) had to depart from this world. The 
successor of the Last Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) Hadrat Stddiq Akbar (Allah be 
pleased with him) had to leave this world. My brother 
and friend 'Umar Faruq (Allah be pleased with him) 
also left this world. "Alas 'Umar! Alas O 'Umar!" I 
submitted: O Awais, (Allarfr mercy be on you)! Umar 
is still alive. He replied: My Lord has informed me that 
he has departed from this world. Then he said: My 
and thy end is also the same. Then he recited Durud 
on the Last Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) and prayed, and said: The advive is that 
you should adopt the way of the Book of Allah and 
the Salihin-i-Ummat and do not become -unattentive of 
the death for a moment. When you go back to your 
people advice them and do not abandon giving advice 
to the creation of Allah. Do not go out even a step 
from the way of the community ( . ) otherwise you 
will become faithless and you will not be knowing that, 
and its consequence will be the Hell. 

He further stated: "0 Ibn Habban! Neither you 
nor I will see each other again. Remember me in your 
prayers and I shall remember you in my prayer. You 
go hither I shall go thither. 

I wanted to accompany with him for a while but 
it could not be so. He wept and made me also to 
weep. I went on seeing him from behind till he entered 
a lane and thereafter no news came about him." 



022 



brother, those who have recognised the 
world their life is such i nd this in the Path of the 
Prophets (peace be upon them) and friends of Allah 
(RahmatuUah 'Alaihim) . These are those who are 
careful and in peace. If it is not possible to be like 
them, then at least make it a habit to be content with 
that which is sufficent "f or bare needs, and avoid luxury 
so that you may not fall in danger. 

This much is sufficent concerning the states of 
this world and the rest w<; have already stated. (Allah 
knows the best) . 

. SECTION VI: 
THE REMEDY FOR LOVE OF WEALTH AND 
HARMS OF MISERLINESS AND GREED AND 
EXCELLENCES OF GENEROSITY 

The green branches of the world are firstly the 
property and the favours and secondly the esteem and" 
majesty but so far as the wealth is concerned, it is the 
cause of great trial. 

Allah Almighty say!;: 

ijj dli U i)>s» t* j 2uii]i '^a\ Ul 
(U«n: oL3i) j£j \fi 'J j^J,i y 

,But he has not assaulted the steep;j and 
what teaches thee what the steep is; the 
freeing of a slave, or feeding on a day of 
hunger. (90 : 11,14) 



"No other ascent is greater than it and it is also 



923 



inevitable and it is both a cause to live and also a 
providence for the hereafter. It is so because a man in 
all circumstances need food, clothing and shelter. 
These things are obtained through wealth. If these are 
not available one remains impatient and if a man 
obtains them, his security (or peace) is in danger. If it 
is not available, the man is confronted with poverty 
and there is danger of falling into disbelief and if it is 
available, man becomes free of worries but there is 
apprehension of pride. 

A poor person is not out of any of the two 
states. Either he is greedy or contended. Contentment 
is a good attribute. Greed is of two shapes, viz., 

to have expectation from the people and 
to write with one's own hands. 

The later form is praise-worthy while the former 
is condemened. Likewise a rich person will be either 
miser or generous. Miserliness is bad in all 
circumstances while the second attribute has both 
forms viz., extra-vagance and moderation. Out of 
these the one is bad in every circumstance but both 
have deep convention, hence its identification and 
destruction is necessary. In short, the wealth has 
advantages as well as disadvantages. Hence to 
recognise them both is a must so that people may be 
saved from harm and obtain the benefit. 

THE ABHORANCE OF WEALTH: 

Allah Almighty says, 



<>24 

(5 : djifcjt) VjjJd\ Ji 'dbTjft 'dJ> ^ 
Let not your weeith or your children 
distract you from Allah's remembrance; 
whoso does that, tbsy shall be the losers. 

(63 : 9)- 

The Holy Prophet peace and blessings of 
be upon him) said, the love of esteem and u 
grows hypocrisy in the heart as water growi 
greenery. He (peace and blessings of Allah be 
him) said, "Two hungry wolves do not create 
mischief in a herd of goats as the love of esteerr 
wealth destroys the faith o: : man." 

The people asked about the worst individui 
the Ummah. He (peace ard blessings of Allah be i 
him) replied, "After me a people will raise up wh( 
eat multiple kind of delicious food and wear mu 
kind of fine dresses and will be fan of beautiful woi 
and will make arrangements of very vah 
conveyances. There bellies will not fill by eating a 
They will not be contem even on much. All 
struggle will be spent in seeking the wealth. Thej 
make the world their goal and will do everything f 
sake. I, Muhammad, command you that whose 
amongst your children come across such a p( 
should neither extend salitations nor go to ask i 
the health nor join the funeral prayer, nor re 
elders of such people. Wiosoever did so, he w 
considered as their helper in the desertion of Islam* 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
said, "Leave the world for the lovely peole becai 
is cause of destruction for a man who takes its i 
than that suffices him while he is not conscious of i 



925 



He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said that a man always says that this is my wealth but 
nothing is his except that food which he eats and 
digests and excretes it as faces, the clothes which he 
wears out and the wealth which he preserves for ever 
by giving it in charity. 

A man submitted, "what is the cause that I do 
not possess the provision of death." He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) asked, "Have you any 
wealth?" 

He submitted, "Yes". 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "First of all send it forward, i.e. giving it in 
charity." It is so because a man's ;heart remains 
engaged in the wealth. It is difficult for him to leave or 
to keep it. 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "A man has three friends. One that is loyal till his 
death, the other till his grave and the third till the Day 
of Judgement. The one loyal with him till death is his 
wealth, the one i.e., loyal with him till grave is his 
relatives and the one that, is loyal with him till the Day 
of Judgement are his actions." 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "When a man dies, the people ask what he has 
left behind while the angles ask what he has sent 
forward." 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 



G26 



said, "Avoid kingship and landlordism as these are the 
cause of love of the world. " 

The Hawwariyyin (disciples) asked Hadrat l Isa 
(peace be upon him), "What is the reason that you 
can walk on the water while we cannot?" He counter 
questioned them, "What is the status of Gold and 
Silver before you?" They submitted, "We love them." 
He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) said, 
"To me they are equal to dust." 

A man teased Hadrat Abu Darda (Allah be 
pleased with him). He prayed for him, "0 Allah! Grant 
him health, long life and much wealth." He considered 
this prayer as the worst cf the prayers and as such 
made it because one who is granted these things, he 
becomes ignorant of the Hereafter being a prey of 
unattentiveness and pride .advertently or inadvertently 
and the said unattentivenesi; proves fatal for him. 

Hadrat Ali (Allah b<! pleased with him) put a 
dirham on his palm and sai l, "You are such thing that 
unless you go not out of my hand, no benefit can 
come to me." 

^Hadrat Hasan Basri (Allah's Mercy be on him) 
said, "By God! Whosoever will keep the gold and 
silver dear to him, Allah Almighty will make him 
disgraced." 

There is a transmissicn that when people forged 
dirham and dinar for the first time, the Satan snatched 
them and put them on his eyes and kissed them and 
said, "Whosoever will love you will be my slave." 



927 



Hadrat Yahya bin Mu'ar (Allah's mercy be on 
him) siad, "Dirham and dinar are scorpions and to use 
them without knowing the cure of the poison of the 
scropion is the cause of destruction." People asked him 
as to what was its cure? He replied, "Those should be 
obtained as lawful income and should not be spent 
extravagantly." 

Muslimah bin Abdul Malik went to see Hadrat 
'Umar bin Abdul Aziz (Allah's mercy be on them) at 
the time of his death and said, "You have done such a 
work which was not done by anyone of us. You have 
thirteen sons and have not preserved even a single 
dirham." He said, "Let me sit." People helped him to 
sit and he said, "I have not given their right to anyone 
else nor I have given them the right of anyone else. 
My son will be either deserving and obedient of Allah 
or its opposite. One who is deserving and obedient, 
Allah will suffice him and if my son is opposite to it, I 
am not concerned with him in whatever state he may 
be." 

Hadrat Muhammad Kab al Qardi (Allah's mercy 
be on him) got much wealth. People advised him to 
leave it for his children. He said, "I will leave it with 
my Lord and will make Allah Almighty my children's 
guarantor so that Allah Almighty may keep them in 
good state." 

Hadrat Yahya bin Muaz (Allah's mercy be on 
him) said, "When a wealthy person dies, two afflictions 
come to him. One is that his whole wealth is snatched 
from him and the next is that it is he who has to 
account for the entire wealth." 



928 



If the wealth is bad for many reasons, it is also 
good for one reason. It contains both aspects of good 
and evil. 

Allah Almighty said, 

( > A. : 3jiJ<) ^'-/^ 

If he leaves wealth. (2 : 180) 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) said, that firstly the lawful wealth is a 
good thing for man but poverty can also become the 
cause of infidelity. The reason is that a person who is 
extremely destitute and his family is living a miserable 
life, when such a person sees the luxury in the world, 
the Satan misleads him by whispering, "God forbid 
how is it just on the part of Allah that He has 
distributed the wealth without any cause that a 
transgressor has so much wealth that He even does 
not know the true assessment of its quantity and even 
where spend it and He kills many hungry and does not 
give a single dirham to them. If Allah is not aware of 
my want and need, it means His information is 
incomplete and if He knows and is unable to give, 
then His power is incomplete and if He has knowledge 
and power and does not give, then what is the use of 
His mercy and if He does not give for the sake of 
reward in the hereafter, it is no reason because He can 
reward without putting anyone poverty and if He does 
not give then it is as if He is not powerful or at least is 
not perfect (powerful) and to believe all these things 
that He is merciful, generous and granter and His 
treasure is full of favours but He keeps the people 
suffering afflictions and if He does not give for any 



929 



expending then it is a. difficulty." Here the Satan 
involves a man into the question of destiny although its 
secret is hidden from all. The object of the Satan is 
that a power and destitute person should start abusing 
heaven and the time and should utter such words as 
that the heavens has become foolish and the time has 
reversed and giving to the undeserving and has no 
care for the deserving. If he is told that both the 
heavens and the time are subordinate and obedient to 
the power of Allah Almighty and such person denies, 
he will render himself infidel, and if by way of joke or 
mockery, he utters that oh yes! They are so 
subordinate even then it is infidelity. The reason is that 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) said, 

"Do not abuse the time. Verily Allah is the 
time." {Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal vol 
5, p. 299 & 311) 

> It means to whom you entrust your affairs 
and name him the time is the being of Allah Thus 
from poverty the smell of infidelity comes out 
However, who has firms belief and is happy with Allah 
in poverty and considers good in it. His affair is 
different. But a most of the people are not of this 
status and understanding, hence for them wealth 
according to need is better as it is a good thing. 

Secondly, the bliss and salvation in the hereafter 
is the objective of all elders and this bliss is difficult to 
obtain without three kinds of favours. One of them 
relates to one-self like knowledge and good morals etc 



930 

the other relates to the physical body like health and 
security and third relates to outside and that is the 
wealth according to the need. The third kind of favour 
is extremely mean and the: meanest of the wealth are 
gold and silver which in themselves have no benefit, 
however, they are for the wants of food and cloth. 
Hence it is better that these things should be used for 
the security of the body aid the body should be used 
for the betterment of the senses and the senses should 
be used as the net of the intellect hunter and the 
intellect is to light the lamps of heart so that man may 
see the Divine emanations and attain Divine gnosis. 
The gnosis of Allah Is the seed of bliss. It is so because 
the ultimate resort of all ft Allah who is the first and 
the last and the cause of existence of all. One who 
knows these fails,, he will keep his convention with only 
so much quantity of the worldly wealth which may be 
useful in ths way and will consider the reminder as a 
fatal poison. 

The worldly wealth is good for a good man. It is 
so because the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) said, "0 Allah! great sustenance to 
the family of Muhammad that sufficeth them. It was 
so because he knew that if it Is in excessive quantity, it 
has the taint of destrutfion and if the quantity is 
deficient, it has the taint of infidelity and the taint of 
infidelity is also cause of destruction. One who knows 
all this, he will never love wealth. The reason Is that 
when a person who considers a thing dear for any 
object then his real objective Is his own vested interest 
and he has got no connection with that thing. One 
who loves wealth is blind and has no brain in hfc head. 
He has not understood the reality of the wealth. It Is 



931 

so because the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) said "The slave of dinar and 
dirham is blind and when a person becomes slave of 
thing, he becomes its servant and to whomsoever he 
says, it becomes his Lord. It is for this reason that 
Hadrat Ibrahim (peace be upon him) said, 

And keep me and my sons away from 
serving idols. (14 : 35) 

The Predecessors have written under the 
commentary of this verse that Hadrat Ibrahim (peace 
be upon him) has referred to the gold and silver by 
mentioning the status because the original status of the 
people are these as all the people are attentive towards 
gold and silver. 

By referring the gold and silver as status, it 
seems that the prophets (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon them) are above apprehension of status 
worship on account of their office of prophethood. 

THE BENEIFTS AND HARMS OF WEALTH. 

Wealth is like a snake. It has poison as well as 
panecea. Unless the posion is not separated from the 
panecea, its secret will not be known. Hence we shall 
state the benefits and harms of the wealth with full 
details. 

The benefits of wealth are of two types. 
(1) Worldly benefits, which need no mention as all 



922 



peope know them. 

Religious benefits. They are of three kinds. 

(a) A man should spend his wealth in worship 
or in the needs of worship as the Haj and 
Jihad as whatever wealth he will spend, it 
will be an expenditure in worship. To spend 
in needs of wojiship is to spend on food, 
clothing, and other wants according to the 
need because by doing so he gets energy 
and becomes frte for worship. Whatever is 
helpful in worship is also the worship itself. 
One who does riot have wealth sufficient for 
his need, he will remain busy, the whole 
day in getting it and he will be deprived of 
the worship whose essence is Zikr and Fikr, 
to become fre<! for worship. The wealth 
spent the extent of need is itself worship. It 
is worthy to be counted amongst religious 
benefits. This ihing changes according to 
the motive behind it. If the freedom is the 
objective for tho hereafter then such wealth 
will be the provision for the journey as well 
as the path. 

Sheikh Abul-Qiaslm Gurgani (Allah's mercy 
on him) had pi!2C3 cf land which sufficed his 
needs. Khawaja ^ — Farmadi (Allah's 
- mercy be on him) stated that one day, 
people brought the corn produce of that 
land to the Sheikh. 'He took from it a 
handful and said, "I shall not change it by 
the trust of all those who trust (in Allah)." 
This secret is unveiled to those who are 



933 



engaged with the observation of heart 
( ). They know how helpful is in this 

way if one is free from worldly worries, 
(b) A man should give wealth to the people. It 
can be in four ways: 

(i) The first way is charity which has reward in 
both the worlds because the blessing of the 
prayer of the poor is very effective. One 
who does not possess wealth, he will be 
unable to get it. 

(ii) The second way is Marawwat (good 
behaviour with fellow beings). Both in faith 
should be dealt with goodly even if they are 
with. There should be exchange of gifts, 
mutual sympathy and payment of rights of 
the people. This conduct on the part of the 
affluent is equally good as by doing so one 
gets the attribute of generosity and the 
generosity is conduct which is worthy of 
prayers. 

(iii) The third way is to protect one's honour 
through it e.g., to give the wealth to a poet 
or a gre . Jy person whom if not given will 
utter uncalled for and obscene words or 
verses. The Holy ?rophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah b^ upon him) said, "The 
spending by which people save their 
honours is charity as it closes the paths of 
back-biting and ill-sayings and saves a man 
from concern because if he will not do so, 
there is possibility that he may himself 
become prepared to take revenge and thus 
enmity may increase. 



934 



(iv) The forth way is to serve those who serve 
him because if a man starts doing all his 
jobs with his own hands, much of his time 
will be wasted. So far as the compulsory 
personal duties are concerned, no one else 
can perform them, e.g., Zikr and Fikr is a 
Farzd-i- 4 Ayn inevitable or obligatory 
( ). Hence it is to be performed by 

the man himself and the work which can be 
done by another person, the time spent in it 
will bring sorrow. The reason is that life is 
short, death is approaching, the distance of 
the journey of hereafter is far and long. For 
it the provision of journey is extremely 
necessary. Hence one should consider 
every breath valuable. A work which could 
be avoided, to spend time in it is not 
proper. The saving of time is not possible 
without spending of wealth because when 
he will give wealth to the servants, they will 
serve for him and save him from hardship. 
No doubt to do all the work with one's own 
hands is worthy of reward but this could be 
done by a man who worships by the 
physical body and not be heart. One who is 
blessed with perfect heart and is able to do 
Zikr and Fikr, his works should be done by 
others so that the works which are better 
than bodily worship, he may have freedom 
for it. 

(c) General Charity without fixing anything: 

Bridges, inns, mosques, dispensaries, trusts for 
the poor etc., are charities that come under the 



935 



heading of general charity and their benefit continues 
for a longer time and due to them the prayers and 
blessings sought by others go on shifting to the deed 
sheet of such person. These things are also not 
possible without wealth. These are the religious benefits 
of the wealth. The worldly benefits are not hidden. A 
man becomes honoured and respectable due to 
wealth. People become in need of him and he is not in 
need of them. He can make many brothers and 
friends. All people love him etc. 

HARMS OF WEALTH 

Some harms are worldly while others are 
religious. Harms are of three kinds: - 

Firstly, the way of disobedience and sin is made 
easy by the wealth and desires of the self demand sin 
while humility and poverty are one of the causes of 
innocense and piety. -When an account of wealth man 
gets power and thereby he is involved in the 
commission of sin, he will be ruined and if he observes 
patience he will become a prey of grief and affliction as 
in the case of having power to do a thing to observe 
patience is difficult. 

The second loss is that even if a wealthy man is 
strong in his faith and able to guard against sins, he 
will not be able to avoid himself from the use of such 
luxuries which are permissible. Who having means will 
eat the bread of barely and wear old worn and torn 
clothes. Everybody is not like the prophet Solomen 
(peace be upon him) who used to do so despite being 
a king. The moment a man indulges in luxuries, his 
body becomes habitual of those things and thereafter it 



936 



becomes difficult for him to observe patience. He 
considers this world as paradise and hates death. It is 
evident that luxuries are not always available from 
lawful wealth. When lawful wealth is not available, 
man indulges in doubtful wealth and such wealth 
cannot be obtained without the help of kings and their 
nearbys. Thus a man gets near to the king by flattery 
and by means of telling lies and behaving like a 
hypocrite. After getting such nearness, he is confronted 
with the apprehension as to whether the king will 
remain happy or not. Further the nearness creates 
jealously in others and they become his enemy and 
want to cause him trouble. Consequently, he also 
wants to take revenge and becomes their enemy and 
inclucates jealousy against them and disputes with 
them. All these habits become the cause of sins 
because due to them falsehood, backbiting, ill will and 
other sins of tongue and heart occur. The love of 
world, which is the root of all sins gives birth to all 
these branches. Thus these harms are not one, two, 
ten twenty, hundred or two hundred. Rather those are 
countless. Still further, it may be said that it is such a 
blind cave which has no exit as hell that has been 
created by Allah for such people. There is no way to 
come out of it. 

The third harm is also such which is 
unavoidable except by the grace of Allah. If is' that a 
man avoids sin and luxury, use of doubtful things, 
remains content on lawful and observes piety and 
spends in the way of Allah and even then the wealth 
will act as a barrier in the heart and deprives man from 
pondering over the Divine greatness. Although the gist 
and essence of all worship is that the remembrance of 



937 



Allah should dominate man and he should have 
perfect intimacy with it and man should become 
independent of all besides Allah. To do so, such a 
heart is needed that is not engaged towards anything 
besides Allah. 

Where a wealthy person has land, he is worried 
about its cultivation disputes of partners, problems of 
revence and account of tenants. Similarly, where one 
has trade or commerce, he remains worried about the 
disputes raised by partners, neighbours, planning for 
journies and profit etc. Where he has animals like the 
cows, goats etc. He remains worried to the maximum 
in case he has a hidden treasure He uses that treasure 
according to need but at the same time, he constantly 
apprehends that someone else may not take it away. 
Thus the worry of the worldly people has a very vast 
field. One who wants to remain aloof from the world 
by living in it is like a person who wants to remain dry 
while living in the water. Such are the advantages and 
disadvantages of wealth. When wise-men saw these 
harms, they understood that wealth according to need 
is a panacea while more than that is poison. The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
also arranged for his sacred wives only so much wealth 
which was extremely needed. He (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) stated in few words that who 
takes more than his bare need is in fact takes the 
weapon of his own destruction. Such a person is 
lacking consciousness. To spend the whole wealth at 
once is also not just because Allah Almighty has said, 

Because of this reason falsehood, backbiting, ill- 
will and other sins of heart and tongue generate. The 



938 



love of the material world is the root cause of all sins 
and from it all these branches come out. Thus these 
are not one or two or ten or twenty or hundred or two 
hundred losses, rather these are countless losses. 
Rather it should be said that it is such a blind cave 
which has no exit like the Hell which has been created 
by Allah for such people and there is no way out to 
get release from it. The third harm is such from which 
no one can escape except whom Allah may save. It is 
that a man avoids sin and luxury, guards against the 
doubtful and suffices over the lawful posing himself 
pious and spends in the way of Allah but the wealth 
becomes an impediment for the heart and deprives the 
man from pondering upon the greatness of Allah 
although the essence and seed of all worship is that the 
remembrance of Allah should dominate man and he 
should have perfect intimacy with Him and should 
become independent of all beside Allah. For it such a 
heart is needed that is not engaged towards any other 
side. 

A wealthy person who has land. He remains 
worried about 'its cultivation, disputes of partners, 
revenue problems and rendition of accounts from the 
tenants. Likewise in the case of trade & commerce, the 
disputes of the partners and neighbours, plans of 
journey, worry of profit keep him engaged. In the 
same manner, if he has livestocks i.e., animals like the 
cows and goats etc. he remains thinking about them. 
There is no wealth which needs less engagement. For 
example, if he has a hidden treasure and he spends 
out of it according to its needs, even then there is 
constant apprehension of its removing away by 
someone else, thus the field of worry of the worldly 



939 

people is very vast. If a man wants to remain fully 
satisfied and secure* alongwith worldly wealth, his 
example is like the person who wants to remain dry 
despite being in the water. These are the advantages 
and disadvantages of wealth, hence the wisemen saw 
these harms they understood that the wealth according 
to need is a panacea while what is more than that is a 
poison. The Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) had arranged for his pious wives only 
according to need and uttered a short statement that 
who soever took the wealth more than his need he in 
fact was preparing the goods for his own destruction 
and he is a man having no man having no conscience. 
To consume the whole wealth at once is also not 
proper as Allah Almighty says: 

o<Jp& VP ±ltf&>3 d j 

Nor spread it all widespread, or thou wilt 
sit reproached and denuded. (17 : 29) 

DISADVANTAGES OF TEMPTATION AND 
GREED AND ADVANTAGES OF 
CONTENTMENT 

Greed is the extreme immorality. It contains 
disgrace, humiliation and shamefulness. When greed is 
not successful, many other bad morals generate. It is 
so because one who hopes something from someone, 
he flatters him and displays show in his statements. If 
the other person insults, he observes patience under 
compulsion and takes lightly all that such other person 



940 

states, be it right or wrong. God has created man as 
greedy. The man does not betome content despite 
possessing much. These things can not be discarded 
with contentment. The Messenger of Allah (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) said, "If a man 
possesses gold of the quantity of equal to two valleys, 
he will be still greedy of the third ^lley. It is the dust 
alone that fills his bally and the one who repents, Allah 
accepts his repentance. He (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) said, "All things relating to man 
become old but the desire to have long life and the 
passion of love of wealth always remain young. He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) also said, 
"A man whom Allah Almighty has granted guidance 
and granted wealth according to his needs and he 
becomes content over it, such a man is of great good 
fortune. He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) also said, "The Holy spirit inspired into my heart 
that no man dies without getting his prescribed 
livelihood." 

O people, fear Allah and do not exceed in 
greed in the matter of seeking the material world. He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) said: 
"Avoid doubtful goods so that you may become doing 
much worshipper among the creation of Allah; and 
remain content with whatever has been granted to you 
by Allah, so that you may become much grateful to 
Allah and do like for the creation which you like for 
yourselves so that you may become perfect believers." 

Hadrat 'Auf bin Malik Ashja'i (Allah be pleased 
with him) said that we were seven or eight or nine 
persons present before the Holy Prophet (peace and 



941 



blessings of Allah be upon him) who said, "Offer 
allegiance to the Messenger of Allah," we submitted, 
"Have we not offered allegiance once?" He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) again drew our 
attention towards offering allegiance." So we extended 
hands and submitted, "On what should we offer 
allegiance." He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) said, "Worship Allah Almighty, establish five 
timely regular prayer, listen the commandments of 
Allah Almighty and act upon them." He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him), said in low voice. "Do 
not ask anything from anyone. " After it the state of the 
people was such that if a stripe had fallen down from 
the hand of anyone, he used to disembark from the 
ride and picked it up himself, but did not ask for it. 
Hadrat Musa (peace be upon him) asked, "0 Allah! 
who is the most affluent amongst your servants?." The 
Divine response was, "One who observes contentment 
over that which I have bestowed upon him." He 
(peace be upon him) further asked, "Who is the most 
just?" The response was, "One who does justice to 
himself." 

Muhammad bin Wasi '(blessings be upon him) 
who used to soak dry bread in water and eat it said, 
"One who is content on it, he is independent of the 
creation." 

Hadrat Ibn Mas'ud (Allah be pleased with him) 
stated, "Daily an angel proclaims: O son of Adam! the 
little quantity of that which fulfils your needs is better 
than much quantity of wealth which creates 
unhappiness and unawareness and negligence." 



942 



Hadrat Samit bin Ijlan (blessings be upon him) 
said, "Your belly is not more than a span in its length 
and width then why should it become the cause of 
throwing you into the Hell?" 

According to a tradition, Allah Almighty says: 
"O sons of Adam! If I give you the whole world, your 
lot in it will be no more than your hunger. Thus when 
I do not give you more than your hunger and also 
save you from the disputes of account of world, then 
what will be more favour upon you than this." A wise 
man's statemetnt is that no one is more grieved than a 
greedy person and no one is more happy in living than 
a content person. A jealous bears the most of the pains 
and no one is more light in his burden than an 
abstinate and no one becomes more worried and 
ashamed than a man of knowledge who does not act 
upon his knowledge. 

NARRATION: 

Sha'bi (blessings be upon him) said that a 
person caught a small bird. The bird asked him: "What 
is your intention?". The man replied, "My intention is 
to slaughter you and to eat you." The bird said, "By 
eating me you will get nothing. I teach you three 
things which are better than your eating me. The first 
thing I will tell you while I am in your hand. The 
second thing 1 will tell you after you release me and I 
will sit on the tree and the third thing I will tell you 
when I will go on the hill and sit there. The man 
accepted his condition and asked the first thing. The 
bird replied, "When a thing goes out of one's hand he 
should not be sorrowful for it." The man released the 



943 



bird and it flew and sat on the tree. The man asked 
the second thing. The bird told, "A thing which is 
impossible should not be believed." Saying this, the 
bird flew and went on the hill and sat there and stated 
itself, "O unfortunate! if you had slaughtered me, you 
would have become so much wealthy that thereafter 
you would never have been in need of anything as in 
my belly, there are two pearls each of the weight of 
twenty mithqal." Hearing this the man put his finger in 
his teeth and pressed it and became sorrowful and 
asked the bird to tell him the third thing. The bird said, 
"You have forgotten the first two things told to you 
what will you do hearing the third thing. I had told you 
that a thing which goes out of hand, you should not 
feel sorrowful for it and should not believe a thing 
which is impossible. My total wieght alongwith my 
wings and feathers was not even 10 mithqals, then 
how could there be two pearls each of the weight of 
twenty mithqals? 

This narration has been told to show that when 
a man becomes a prey of greed, he believes 
everything. 

Ibn Sammak (Allah's mercy be on him) stated, 
"Greed is a chain of your neck and feet, you should 
cut it and through away." 

CURE OF GREED AND TEMPTATION 

The remedy for greed and temptation is a 
compound made of the bitterness of patience, the 
sweetness of knowledge and hardship of action. All the 
medicines of all heart diseases are made of such 



944 



constituents. This treatment is done in five ways. The 
first is the action. Its method is that man should reduce 
his expenses, wear simple dress and eat simple food as 
such quantity of food and dress becomes available 
without greed and temptation easily. If a man will 
make show of luxuries and enhance expenses, it will 
be difficult for him to tie content. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) said, 

"One who is moderate in expenses never 
becomes needy." 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) also said, "Three things are such with which the 
salvation of creation relates; to fear Allah in every 
state whether open or hidden; to spend moderately in 
every state whether being rich or poor; and to do 
justice in every state whether it is a state of happiness 
or unhappiness." 

A man saw Abu al-Darda (blessings be upon 
him) picking up the seeds of dry dates and saying that 
ease and gentleness in the matter of livelihood is an act 
of wisdom and knowledge. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) said, "One who observes moderation in 
expenses will remain independent of the creation and 
one who is extravagant will become needy and the one 



945 

who remembers Allah, Allah will love him." He (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) also said, "To 
spend according to well-planning is half of the 
economics." 

Secondly when one gets livelihood according to 
his daily need, he" should not worry for the next day as 
such sorts of whispering is created by the Satan that 
perhaps the life may be long and nothing may be 
available tomorrow and that as such it should be 
searched today by hook or by crook. Regarding this, 
Allah Almighty says, 

(YtA : ' ' 

The Devil promises you poverty and bids 
you to indecency. ... (2 : 268) 

"The Satan puts fear in you of poverty and 
commands you the obscenities. In other words, he 
wants to put you to grief and concern showing the 
gaint of tomorrows poverty. But a man can easily save 
him from it by understanding this fact that the 
livelihood is not dependent upon greed, rather it has 
been predestined and whatever has been destined shall 
reach." 

No cob remains without a fly. The sender of 
livelihood does send it. 



The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) saw Ibn Mas'ud (Allah be pleased 



946 



with him) grieved and said, "Don't be grieved. 
Whatever is destined for you by Allah shall reach you. 
A man should know that Allah provides sustenance 
from such place of which he even had no imagination. 
Allah Almighty says, 

v -"9»" O? i *J J**H &i J* J 

If any fears Allah, He will make a way out 
for him, and He will provide him from 
whence he cannot imagine. (65 : 2,3) 

Abu Sufyan (Allah be pleased with him) state< 
that a pious man never dies of hunger. It means Allal 
Almighty makes the people kind to him and the wealtl 
reaches him without asking. 

» 

Abu Hazim (Allah be pleased with him) stated 
"Whatever is there, it is of two kinds. Whatever is nr 
livelihood will reach me without delay and whatever i 
the lot of others cannot reach me despite the efforts c 
all, those are in the heavens and the earth. Hence m 
restlessness will be of no use." 

Thirdly, if a man considers that if he does nc 
become greedy and observes patience, he will becom 
grieved and if he becomes greedy and observe 
patience, he will be disgraced and also grieved. Peop! 
will blame him due to greed while the danger c 
punishment in the hereafter is apart from it. And if h 
observes patience, he will get reward and the peop 
will appreciate him. Thus a grief coupled with rewan 
appreciation and honour is better than a grief which 



947 



coupled with disgrace, condemnation and danger 
punishment. 

The Holy Prophet (peae and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) said, "The honour of a Muslim lies in 
being independent of the people." Ali (Allah be 
pleased with him) said, "You are the prisoner of a 
person on whom you depend and you are the 
commander of a person who depends on you and you 
are like the person of whom you need not." 

Fourthly, a man should ponder upon it as to 
why he shows greed and temptation. If he does so to 
fill his belly then an ass and ox etc. eat more than him; 
and if he does so for lust then the pig and the bear 
have more lust than him; and if his object is pomp and 
show and good dress then the Jews and Christians are 
much advanced; and if a man leaves greed and 
becomes content on a little then he will not see like 
him except the prophets and the saints. Thus to be like 
such esteemed personalities and to act according to 
their excellent model is better than adopting the model 
of beasts and animals. 

Fifthly, a man should consider the harms of 
wealth. When the wealth is more, the harms and 
dangers will also be more in this world. So far as the 
hereafter is concerned the poor shall enter paradise 
five hundred years prior to the rich. A man should live 
in this world in a state that he should see those who 
are lesser than him. The Satan excites from worldly 
point of view to see that such and such person 
possesses such and such thing which you do not have 
It also whispers that such and such saint and scholar 



fa»h keep ,„ vl ™ th« «,T f ,*;" ,he ""Her of 
have Mnaaon a „ ^ deSl 1 !' de ' S ? ,hat "e may 
of worldly affalrTa man «h v"? the ™ tt « 
Possess l4er thl hta so W h ° 0k ,0 ' h0Se wh ° 
self rich and prosperous! ' COnslder hi "> 

SUPER o ' OR,IY AND "EVVARD OF GENEROSITY 

contend,. GrLtnTe fa^K- Sh °" ,d ad °" 
wealthy should adopHe™ 'si °" e Who ls 
"Pon mUerllness. EeC o?A,Ia h °, U "« act 
btelnp of Allah be upon him) saW and 
. tree of Pa radlse wh p ^ ^ <~lty ls a 

world. A generous man hold. . 9lns ln ,he 
"h'ch fakes h,m Into Parage o7, h °' \ b ' and "° 
miserliness Is a tree of HeU A If °' her hand ' 
of Its branches .hat becorL A PerSOn holds °™ 
Wo the Hell." And he °™* A 2"" °' ' al<ln9 hlm 
"Pon him) said 'Two mo", and blessi ^ of Allah be 
'oves: One Is sterol and f* "»* h Allah 
"* A»ah diXlt and hab " 

said, b > "Pon him, 

Allah), he has b en bit"! I* " " Wa " <friend °< 
"ablt." He (peae and btelTofZh? ' ^ 9 °° d 

Holy Prophet (peae and blessings of Allah 



949 



be upon him) ordered to put to death war prisoners 
due to their war crimes but left a man. Hadrat Ali 
(Allah be pleased with him) asked the reason for it. He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) replied that 
Jibrail (peace be upon him) had told him that the said 
person was generous and that he should not be killed. 

* 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "The food of generous is like the medicine while 
the food of a miser is like the disease." 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "The generous is nearer to Allah Almighty, the 
paradise and the people while a miser is far away from 
all of them. Allah Almighty loves more an ignorant 
generous than a miser worshipper and miserliness is 
the worst disease. 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "The Abdal of my Ummah would not enter 
paradise due to their prayer and fasting. Rather it is 
due to their generosity, purity of heart and affection on 
creation." 

There is a tradition that Allah Almighty sent 
revelation to Musa (peace be upon him) that Samari 
should not be murdered in view of his generosity. 

Hadrat 'Ali (Allah be pleased with him) said, 
"When the world is attentive towards you and also 
when it turns its face away from you, you should 
continue expending." 

A man wrote about his destituteness to Irnam 
Hussain (Allah be pleased with him). He said that his 



950 



object will be achieved. People asked that he had said 
it without reading the paper. He replied that he did not 
like that the said person should stand before him 
disgraced for which he has to account for before Allah 
Almighty. 

Muhammad bin Al-Munkadir (blessings be him) 
has transmitted on the authority of Umm Darah [(the 
maid-servant of Umm al-Mu'minin Sayyidah 'A'isha 
Siddiqah (Allah be pleased with her)] that once* 
Abdullah bin Zubair (Allah be pleased with him) sent 
two bags full of silver and one hundred and eighty 
thousand dirhams to Hadrat 'A'isha. She distributed all 
that (gift). In the evening, she summoned me to bring 
something for breakfast and I took bread and olive oil 
as no meat was available. I submitted, "You could 
have ordered to bring for us meat of a dirham." On 
that she said, "I would have asked to bring it if you 
had made me remember at that time." 

Amir Mu'awiyyah (Allah be pleased with him) 
when reached Madina Tayyibah, Hadrat Husain (Allah 
be pleased with him) asked his elder brother Hadrat 
Hasan (Allah be pleased with him) not to salute him. 
When Amir Mu'awiyyah (Allah be pleased with him) 
came out, Hadrat Hasan (Allah be pleased with him) 
said, "I am indebted" and followed him and narrated 
his state of affairs. A camel had left behind. Amir 
Mu'awiyyah (Allah be pleased with him) asked about 
it. He was informed that it was laden with a treasure of 
eighty thousand dinars. He ordered that the same 
should be handed over to Hadrat Hasan (Allah be 
pleased with him) to pay his debits. 



951 



Hadrat Abu al-Hasan Mada'ini (blessings be 
upon him) stated that Hadrat Hasan, Hadrat Husain 
and Hadrat Abdullah bin Ja'far (Allah be pleased with 
themV proceeded for Haj. The camel carrying the 
provisions for journey lagged behind. At one place 
they felt hunger and thirst and went to an old lady and 
asked her if there was anything to eat and drink. She 
replied in the affirmative and brought the* milk of a 
goat. When they asked about food, she replied, 'The 
goat be slaughtered and its meat be taken as food." 
They did the same and said to the lady, "We are 
Quraish. You should meet us on our return from Haj 
so that we may do good Jo you." Saying this they let 
out. When the husband of the lady came, he became 
angry on having presented the goat as food to those 
persons who were not previously known to her. After 
some days, the said lady and her husband came 
Madina and picked the camel dungs and sold the same 
to make their both hand meet. One day, the said old 
lady passed by the door of Hadrat Hasan (Allah be 
pleased with him). The later identified her and asked 
as to whether she knew him. She replied in the 
negative. He made her to recollect the incident. 
Thereafter he gave one thousand goats and one 
thousand dinars and sent her to his younger brother 
along with his slave. He also gave the similar quantity 
and sent her further to Hadrat Abdullah bin Ja'far 
(Allah be pleased with him) . He asked her as to what 
was given her by the two, and thereafter gave her the 
goats and dinars equal to the quantity given by both of 
them and while saying farewell to her he said that had 
she come to him pier to going to them, he would have 
given her so much that they both could not have been 
able to give that much. Thus the said lady alongwith 



952 



the said huge amount and property returned to the 
house of her husband. 

STORY: 

There was a very generous person in Arabia. 
After his death, some travellers came to his grave due 
to hunger and slept there. One of the travellers had a 
camel. He saw the generous person in dream who 
said, "Will you sell this camel for my best camel.?" He 
replied, "Yes." The generous person had left behind 
the best camel at the time of his death. The traveller 
sold his camel in lieu of the best camel. The dead 
person's son called the traveller and asked him as to 
whether he had purchased some best camel from such 
and such person. He replied in the affirmative and 
added but that was affair in a dream. The son of the 

dead person handed over the best camel to the 
traveller and told him that he was the son of the dead 
person who had come in his dream also and diverted 
him that if he was his son, he should hand over this 
camel to such and such person. 

STORY: 

Hadrat Abu Sa'id Khargosh (blessings be upon 
him) narrated that there was a person in Egypt by the 
name of Muhtasib, who used to save something and 
distribute it amongst the needy. Once a son was bom 
to a person who was penniless. He went to Muhtasib 
who accompanied him and asked many persons to 
give something but none of them gave anything. Then 
he took the needy to a grave and sat there and said, 
"O man of God, Allah's mercy be on you. You were 



953 

such a person who used to fulfil the needs of the 
destitute by the leave of Allah. Today, I have tried my 
best for this man but all in vain." Thereafter he got up 
and gave me half dinar which he had and said, "Fulfil 
your need with it considering it a debt." During the 
night, the dead person met Muhtasib in dream and 
told him that he had heard him but there was no 
permission for conversation. Now you go to my sons 
and ask them to dig the place near the oven where 
five hundred dinars are lying burried. And that the 
same be given to him. Next day, Muhtasib went to his 
sons and told them whole story, who gave him five 
hundred dinars. He took the dinars and said the 
dream was not a command. Hence they may take 
them back. The sons said, "It is astonishing that our 
father is generous even being dead and we be misers 
being alive". Muhtasib took the dinars and went to that 
person who had given him the half dinar. The said 
man paid back the half dinar and returned the 
remaining to Muhtasib and said him to distribute it 
among the needy as his need has been fulfilled. Hadrat 
Abu Sa'id (blessings be upon him) said, "God knows 
better who was most generous amongst them." He 
further stated that when he went to Egypt, he searched 
the house of that dead person and met his sons and 
observed the marks of excellence on their faces and at 
that moment he recited the following verse of the Holy 
Qur'an. 

And their father was a righteous man. 

(18 :82) 



my dear (Reader)! all thjese are the blessings 



. 954 

°' »e generosity. There i. - 

«- " <hat ft survives?* 2 '° be «***•<« 

hat H adra , I brahlm The reason !s 

" en,er,a lnlng me ou^J™ ""I"" habl ^ 
are prese nt at his grave. " ow ,hose blessings 

*« Hat'ttat'T;; ,'£ nSS be U »°" »,d 
Makkah Muai^f upon hj 
*nars with hlm „ ^ . He had ten thousand 

M"a*amah and spread TalMh V'"' ° Uts,de »«** 

coth. Whoever sateeThlm £ J *"? 0n a 

*nars « , he 2 h ta he gave him a handful of 

Wished. The moment he rode , Who,<! *"ount 
o~ard and sot hold the tS" " V* • "»" came 
'Wrings be upon him ,o f"\ He orde * d Rabl 
d '™ and also ask him * '°<» hundred 

Hadrat Aii (AU»u u 
»« P ing one day! askedT" Wi,h h,m > — 

< h « for the last seven da vs * *" reason - H * 'old 
house. **» "o guest had come In his 

"nder ^on? 'V* ' riend and <°< d tet he 

, aeot of four hundrerf wwu 1 he w as 

four hundred dlrhams and l^d He sa « *n 
hlm ** if he had to teen th ? eP 'C S - Hls •* 
were given to that person ul P , m ^ the same 
»eep,„ s on , tha , H replied, - foom , ™ 

he had to ask the «,me IrlT^l"" »»« 'hat 
3i«n to him without asking ' Should ha « 

CONDEMNATION OF MISERLINESS 



955 



(1:^1) 

And whoso is saved from the avarice pf 
his soul-those are the ones successful. 

(59 : 9) 

4, 1^ u ^ > > >; ^ 

And let not those who covetously withhold 
of that which Allah has bestowed on them 
of His Bounty (Wealth) think that it is 
good for them. Nay. it will be worse for 
them; the things which they covetously 
withheld shall be tied to their necks ljke a 
collar on the Day of Resurrection. (3 : 180) 
The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) said, "You people should remain away 
from the miserliness as those people who were before 
you had destroyed due to it and it was the miserliness 
that had excited them to make the murder and the 
unlawful as lawful." 

He said, "Three things are destructive, viz., 

(0 The miserliness, when you adopt It while its 
opposition is necessary. 

(ii) The desire which is followed. 

(iii) Self appreciation (and self esteem)." 

Abu Sa'id Khudari (blessings be upon him) 
reported that two persons came to the Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) and 



956 



begged an amount for a camel. He (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) gave that amount to 
them. They came out and thanked 'Umar. 'Umar 
(Allah be 'pleased with him) narrated that fact to the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him). He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "Such and such person had taken more than that 
but he had not thanked." He (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) said, "One who comes and gets 
something by making false cries. It is fire" 

'Umar (Allah be pleased with him) submitted, "If 
it is fire, then why your noble self grants it." He (peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) said, "They cry 
while Allah Almighty by the token of His greatness has 
said, "I shall not allow a miser to enter into Paradise." 

One day the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) was circumambulating while a 
person holding the ring of KaTjah was submitting, "O! 
the most merciful of the merciful, forgive my sins for 
the sake of blessings of this House. He asked, "What is 
your sin?" The man submitted, "My sin is so great that 
I cannot state it." 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
asked, "Is it greater than the earth?" The man 
responded, "Yes." 

The man replied, "My sin is even greater then 
the Heaven." 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
asked, "Even bigger than the Throne?" 



957 



The man replied, "My sin is even greater than 
the Throne." 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
asked, "Is your sin greater than Allah Almighty?" 

The man submitted, "Allah Almighty is the 
greatest." 

* 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) asked the details (of his sin) . 

• He submitted, "I am a very wealthy* person. 

Whenever a needy person comes before me, I 
consider him a fire that may burn me." 

He (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "Be away from me. You may not burn me in 
your fire." Thereafter he (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) said, "By the token of Him, who sent 
me with Truth! If you offer prayers for one thousand 
years between the Rukn and Maqam-i-Ibrahim and 
you weep so much that canals flow with your tears and 
you die as a miser, your abode shall be the Hell. 
Beware! Miserliness is from infidelity and infidelity is in 
the Fire. It is a pity that you have not heard that Allah 
Almighty says:- 

And as for him who hoards he hoards 
only from his soul. (47 : 38) 



7JO 



And whoso is saved from the avarice of 
his soul-those are the ones successful: 

(59 : 9) 

Hadrat Ka'b (Allah be pleased with him) said 
that on every person two angels are appointed daily 
who proclaim, "0 Allah! One who does not spend his 
wealth, Thou may destroy his wealth and the one who 
spends it grant him better substitute for it." 

t 

Hadrat Imam Abu Hanifah (blessings be upon 
him) stated, "I shall never call a miser a just person nor 
I shall hear his evidence as the miserliness inclines him 
to take more than his own right." 

Hadrat Yahya bin Zakariyya (the Prophets of 
Allah)^ (peace be upon them) saw the Iblis and asked 
him, "Whom do you consider your worst enemy and 
whom do you consider your best friend." 

The Iblis replied, "A miser abstinate person is 
my friend who worships at the cost of his health but 
the miserliness wastes his worship, while a generous 
transgressor is my enemy who lives in comfort and 
ease but I apprehend that due to his generosity, Allah 
Almighty may grant 'him taufiq to repent taking mercv 
on him." 



REWARDS OF GIVING PREFERENCE TO 
OTHERS 

The reward of giving preference to others over 
ones own self is higher than generosity. It is so because 
a generous is one who is not in need of a thing himself 
and gives it to another while the preference is that a 
person who is himself in need of a thing and even 



959 



then gives it to another. The perfection of generosity is 
this that a man gives to another a thing despite his 
own need. Similarly, the perfection of miserliness is 
this that a man does not spend even on himself e.g., If 
he is a sick, he does not get his treatment and awaits 
in his heart for the medicines to be provided to him by 
someone without spending his own money. 

Allah Almighty has praised the Ansar of 
Madinah due to their giving preference to others over 
themselves. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) said, "Whoever gets a thing which he 
desires and he gives it to another despite his own such " 
desire, Allah Almighty forgives him." 

Hadrat 'A'ishah (Allah be pleased with her) 
said, "We did not eat continuously for three days with 
satiation in the house of the Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) but Allah Almighty 
granted the taufiq of preference. A guest came to the 
Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him). Nothing was available in the house to entertain 
him. A companion from the Ansar took him with him 
but per chance the food in his house was also not 
sufficient. He put the food before him and 
extinguished the lamp and behaved in the manner as if 
he was also taking food with him. Next day the Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said to that companion that the behaviour of 
generosity and good conduct he had expressed last 
night in the matter of the guest was liked by Allah 
Almighty on which the following Qurani verse who 
revealed:- 



960 



And preferring them above own selves, 
though they had a want. ... (59 : 9) 

"Those who entered the city and the faith 
before them love those who flee into them for refuge, 
and find in their breasts no need for that which hath 
been given them, but prefer (the fugitives) above 
themselves though poverty become their lot. And who 
so is seved from his own avarice — such are they who 
are successful." 

Hadrat Musa (peace be upon him) requested 
Allah Almighty to inform him of the esteem and status 
of the last Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him). Allah Almighty said, "O Musa! you have 
no power to see him, however, 1 show you one of his 
ranks. "When the said rank was shown.it was 
apprehended that Hadrat Musa (peace be upon him) 
might become senseless due to its light and greatness. 
Hadrat Musa (peace be upon him) submitted, "O 
Allah! on what account the last Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) obtained this rank?" 

Allah Almighty replied, "O Musa! a servant who 
exercises giving preference to others over himself once 
in his life, I feel ashamed to ask him to account for. 
The abode of such a servant is Paradise, in which he 
may live wherever he wants." 

Once Hadrat 'Abdullah bin Ja'far (Allah be 
pleased them) was performing a journey and he went 



961 

into a date garden. A negro slave was its caretaker. 
Three breads were brought for. that slave that suddenly 
a dog came there. The slave put one loaf before the 
dog, then the second loaf and then the third loaf and 
the dog ate all of them. Hadrat Abdullah (Allah be 
pleased with him) asked the salve as to what were his 
daily wages. He replied that the same as he has given. 

Hadrat Abdullah (Allah be pleased with him) 
asked the slave as to why he put all the beads before 
the dog. The slave replied, "The does not live here 
and I thought that it might have come from a far off 
place and therefor I wanted that it may not remain 
hungry." 

Abdullah (Allah be pleased with him) asked: 
"Now what will you take as a food?" 

The slave replied: "I would observe patience." 

Abdullah (Allah be pleased with him) 
remarked., "It is astonishing that people blame me of 
generosity while this slave is more generous than me." 

Thereafter Abdullah (Allah be pleased with him) 
pruchased the said slave (from his master) and set him 
free. He also purchased the garden and gifted it to the 
slave. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) who was the mercy for all the worlds 
avoided even to cause any injury to the disbelievers. 
Hadrat Ali (Allah be pleased with him) slept in his 
place so that if God forbid the disbelievers would attack 
on the Holy Prophet, (peace and blessings of Allah be 



962 

upon him) he may sacrifice his life in place of the Holy 
Prophet ( peace and blessing of Allah be upon him). 

Allah Almighty said to Hadrat Jibra'il and 
Hadrat Mika'il (Peace be upon them), "We have 
created fraternity between you both and have 
increased the life of one of you than the other. Who is 
of you that gives his life to the other?" 

Each one of them wanted his own long life On 
that Allah Almighty said, "Why you did not do like 
Hadrat All. I had given him fraternity with Muhammad 
the most honoured (Peace and blessing of Allah be 
upon him) and he expressed perfect sacrifice and 
preference and slept in place of his cousin. Jou both 
go to him and guard him against his enemy." 

Thus Jibr'il (peace.be upon him) stood on the 
headside and Hadrat Mika'il (peace be tham) stood on 
the feet side and continued saying, "Hurra! O son of 
Abu Tallb, Allah Almighty is proud of you before the 
angels. At that occassion the following verse was 
revealed. 

i jit C»U>> 't&> 0* Of J 

And of mankind is he who would sell 
himself, seeking the pleasure of Allah: 

(2:207)) 

Hadrat Hasan Antaki (blessings be upon 
him)was one of the great teachers. More than thirty 
individuals collected from among his friends but there 



963 



was no sufficient food to serve them. He made pieces 
of the available bread and kept the same before them 
to tat and took away the lamp. They remained sitting 
around the dining table and when he brought back the 
lamp, all the pieces of bread were lying intact. He 
exercised preference and his friends also exercised 
preference in the same way. 

Hadrat Hudaifah' Adwi (Allah be pleased with 
him) stated that many companions were martyred in 
the battle of Tabuk. I was searching my cousin with a 
cup of water in my hand and when I found him. He 
was breathing his last. I asked him about the water and 
he desired to have it. But at that time the sigh of 
another injured was heard and my cousin asked me to 
attend him. He was Hadrat Hassham bin al-As (Allah 
be pleased with him). He was also breathing his last. I 
offered him water that the sigh of a third injured was 
heard. I rushed towards him but he had died. I 
immediately returned towards Hadrat Hassham. too he 
had died and then I came to my own cousin but he 
had also expired. 

The elders have stated that no one has gone 
from this world as he had come except Hadrat Bashar 
bin Hafi (blessigs be upon him) as at the time he was 
breathing his last, a beggar came to him, he gave his 
shirt to the beggar and himself departed from this 
world in a cloth taken on hire. 

WHO IS GENEROUS AND WHO IS MISER 

Every person calls himself gererous while there 
is possibility that people may consider himself a miser. 



964 

Hence, to know its reality is necessary because it is a 
big disease and people [should know! it and get it 
treated. There cannot be a man from who whatever is 
asked by the people is given by him. If this be the 
[cause] of miserliness then all are misers. 

There are many views in this respect. Most of 
the people state that whatever is obligatory upon a 
man to give under the Shariah, if it is not given by 
such a man, he is miser. Similarly where the giving of 
a thing is not convenient for a man and he does not 
give he is a miser. This is not a valid opinion as 
according to us by the application of this rule one who 
returns to baker the breads and to the butcher the 
meat being less in quantity. He will be considered a 
miser. Similarly under this rule a man who gives to his 
wife and children only so much maintainance as 
ordered by the court he will be declared a miser 
likewise a man who is eating bread and on seeing a 
beggar coming conceals it, he will be termed to miser. 

It is so because the Shariah suffices the giving of 
only that much quantity which one can afford to give. 
Allah Almighty says:- 

If he should ask it of you and importune 
you, ye would hoard it, and He would 
bring to light your (secret) hates. (47 : 37) 

Thus a valid statement is that the miser is he 
who does not give the thing worth-giving. There is 



965 

wisdom of Allah Almighty in creation of wealth. When 
Divine wisdom desires a thing to be given its non 
giving is miserliness. The thing worth-giving is that 
which is commanded by the Shariat and the good 
manners to be given. Whatever is necessary to be 
given in the Shariat is well known but whatever is 
necessary to be given according to good-manners that 
goes on changing according to the circumstances of the 
people, the quantity of the wealth, and the miser. 
There are many things which are bad manners for the 
rich while those are not bad manners for the poor. 
Similarly there are certain things which are bad for the 
family but not for others. There is distinction between 
the affairs of the friends and the aliens. There is 
difference between the affairs of the guest and the host 
and of sale and purchase. Similarly there is difference 
between the affairs of the old and the young, of the 
male and the female. 

Thus the true definition (of a miser) is that a 
miser is a man who makes the piling up of money his 
objective and does not spend despite need. Where the 
need for saving is more than the need of spending the 
expenditure will become spendthriftness. ( ). 
Both spendthriftness and miserliness are bad habits. In 
the presence of a gUest the point of good manners 
should be given preference over the wealth. It is a bad 
manner not to deal goodly with the guest on the 
excuse that one has already paid the zakat of his 
wealth. When the neighbourer is needy.and a man has 
wealth, n to take care of the (needs) of the 
neighbourer is miserliness. 

When all the requirements of Shariaf and 



966 

Murawwat (the Divine law and the good manners) are 
fulfilled and still there remain behind much wealth the 
reward of the hereafter should be sought by spending 
it in charity. However, to save some wealth keeping in 
view the circumstances is not bad but to give it 
preference over the objective of reward is bad and 
miserliness in the eye of the elders while it is not 
miserliness in the eyes of masses. It is so because the 
eye of masses is only on the world and this thing goes 
on changing according to the circumstances of each 
case. Thus if any one takes care of only the Sharia 
and Murawwat he is saved from miserliness, but he will 
get the rank of generosity only when he spends more. 
The more he spends the more will be elevation in his 
rank to generosity and he will get the reward 
accordingly. A man is generous when he does not feel 
it a burden on him to give to others. -If he feels 
otherwise then he is not generous. If he gives to others 
with the passion of gratitude and reciprocation even 
then he is not generous. Rather, in reality, only such a 
person is generous who gives without having any 
vested interest. This thing is not within the power of a 
man. Rather, in fact.this is the attribute of Allah 
Almighty alone. A man who gives to others and 
considers the reward of the Hereafter Sufficing him, he 
H called generous only mataphorically as he does not 
want the immediate reward in this world actually. 

According to religion the generosity is that a 
man should not fear laying his life purely for the love 
of Allah Almighty without keeping any hope for 
reward in the hereafter. Only the love of Allah 
Almighty should be in his view. His only ob)ed\ve 
should be to sacrifice his life for the sake of Allah and 



967 

in doing so he should consider it a service. If he keeps 
any hope then such hope will take the form of his 
compensation (for the said service) and it will not be 
the generosity. 

THE CURE OF MISERLINESS. 

The cure of miserliness is also a combination of 
knowledge and action. By knowledge it is meant that 
first of all its cause is to be identified as without it the 
cure is not possible. Alongwith it the hope of long life 
is attached. It is so because if the^miser knows that he 
will not live beyond a day or an year, it will be easy for 
him to spend. However, if he has children it is a 
different matter and he considers its survival and his 
miserliness is increasing. For this reason the Holy 
Prophet (Peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said:- 

"Children become the cause of miserliness, 
cowardice and ignorance. "Sometime due to love of 
wealth evil desires are generated or the love of wealth 
is not for desires but the wealth itself become beloved, 
sometime it so happens that the wealth of a man 
remains untouched by him for the whole of his life and 
only income of his land etc. is sufficient for his family 
but if he falls ill he does not get treatment. He does 
not pay Zakat and keeps his money hidden under the 
earth although he has to die, and the enemy will take 
his wealth. Even then the miserliness restrains from 
spending. This is a big disease which is very, rarely 
cured. 

If you understand its cause then by observing 
contentment and discarding (your) desires you will be 



968 

able to treat it and will be blessed with becoming 
independent of wealth. 

So far as long life is concerned its cure lies in 
remembering the death most oftenly and seeing 
towards fellowmen who suddenly died and took away 
with them nothing but sorrow. After their death their 
enemies distributed their wealth by expressing sorrow. 

So far as the needs of the children are 
concerned it can be cured by understanding this fact 
that the One who has created them is also their (Lord 
and) Sustainer. Whatever has been destined for them 
that will certainly reach them. If, God forbid, the 
destituteness has been their destiny then by the 
miserliness of any one they will not become rich. 
Rather they will destroy the whole wealth. If the 
richness is their destiny they will get the wealth from 
some other sources. A man should see that many 
affluent persons are such whose parents had left no 
inheritance and there are many such persons who had 
got big inheritance but spoiled it. 

A man should feel that if children are obedient 
to Allah then Allah Almighty will Himself be a 
Guarantor of their needs otherwise the destituteness is 
better for them as they will be saved from committing 
at least the such sins which reed wealth. 

To ponder upon the Ahadith concerning the 
condemnation of miserliness and appreciation of 
generosity and to think that the abode of a miser is the 
Hell is also an effective cure. It should be remembered 
that a miser despite all his acts of worship will go to the 
Hell. Thus what else advantage is needed by a man 



969 



than to save himself from the displeasure of Allah and 
falling into Hell. The circumstances of the misers 
should also be considered that how worst is the 
opinion of the general public against them that and 
how little they are in their eyes. This is the cure by 
knowledge. When a man ponders upon the said facts 
and feels the disease curable and an (urge) to spend 
generates in his heart then he should immediately 
make himself busy in actualizing such thought and the 
moment such a thought strikes in his mind he should 
begin spending (in the noble ways) . 

Hadrat Abu al-Hasan, Abu Sajd (blessings be 
upon him) was in the bathroom that he directed his 
servant to give such and such garments to such and 
such needy person. The servant submitted:" Patience 
could have been observed till coming out." 

He replied: "I apprehended the striking of some 
other idea that may change this (good idea)". 

Short of spending cure of miserlines is not 
possible just as without going away on a jurney 
separation from a beloved is not possible nor a lover 
may get release from the love. 

The fact is that it is better to throw away the 
wealth into a river to get release from it than to keep it 
safe as act of miserliness. It is a subtle and pure 
strategy to be after good name and to say to ones own 
self: "Do spend so that people may call you a 
generous person." 

To dominate the love of show and esteem over 
the love of wealth is also a cure of miserliness. After 



970 

cure of greed for wealth the show be cured. It is like 
making a baby intimated and busy with a toy he likes 
the most before weaning him so that he may forget the 
snekling. Bad habits can be best cured by making an 
attribute dominant over the other so that, the 
dominant may casue the removal of the (effect of) the 
dominated. Its example is like the blood stain which is* 
not removed by the use of water should be washed 
with the urine so that due to its alkali the stain may go 
off. Later on the washing of the urine on the cloth with 
the water becomes easy. 

Thus a man who cures miserliness with show is 
like a person wjio cures impurity with another 
impurity. But when show is not deeply rooted in his 
heart its advantage will be that cure will be easy. 

Although the miserliness and the fondness of 
self-praise are human weakness but their example is 
such that in the garden of humanity the roses and 
flowers both co-exist. 

Generosity is a flower which is not unlawful for 
the sake of good-name. The show is unlawful only in 
the worship. 

To hold wealth to spend it for the sake of Allah 
when needed has not concerned with human 
(weakness). Rathe'r it is worth-appreciation and better 
as to be amongst the flowers is better than to be in the 
thorns. 



In short, the cure of miserliness is that a man 
should spend by compulsion so that a habit may 
develop in him. 



971 



Some elders have cured their desciples in the 
way that they appointed a corner for each one of them 
so that their heart be intimated with (such corner). 
When they found that the objective has been achieved 
they changed their corners respectively. If they found 
that the desciple has worn new shoes liked by him he 
was ordered to give it to the other desciple and he 
gave it. 

Once the Messenger of Allah (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) put new laces in the 
shoes and he glanced on it while in (Nafl)prayer. He 
ordered to bring back the old lace. It was brought and 
replaced for the new one. The conduct of Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) in 
that way shows that the method of removing the love 
of wealth from the heart is to remove the wealth away 
from oneself as when the hand will be empty the heart 
will also become empty. This is the reason that a 
neeedy person's heart is expanded but when he piles 
up wealth he becomes a miser being engaged in its 
multiplication. 

A man presented to a king a cup made of 
turquoise fitted with diamond. Evidently the cup had 
no parallel. A wise-man was present there in the king's 
court. The king asked him as to how he found the 
cup. He replied that its consequence is either a 
calamity or destituteness and without it your excellency 
was free from both those circumstances. The king 
asked: "For what reason?" The wise man replied. If it 
is broken, it is a calamity as it is unique and if it is 
stolen by the thieves then it is destituteness till it is 
recovered. Per chance it broke and the King said: "The 



972 

opinion of wise-man was perfectly valid." 

THE CURE OF THE POISON OF WEALTH 

The similitude of wealth is like the snake that 
possesses both poison and the panacea. As we have 
already stated that a man who does not know the 
antidote and takes it into his hand he will die. 

As the wealth is not totally an evil thing hence 
some of the Companions (Allah be pleased with them) 
were wealthy like Hadrat Abd al Rahman bin Auf 
(Allah be pleased with him). Thus to be wealthy 
person is not bad. 

As a boy who sees a charmer catching snakes 
and putting them into his box and filling it with them 
and considers that the snake charmer is catching the 
snakes as they are soft and look beautiful in the hand 
and the boy catches a snake that bites him and kills 
him. 

There are five antidotes of wealth. The first 
antidote is that man should fully understand the reason 
for creation of the wealth. We have already stated that 
wealth is necessary for food, dress. The body is for the 
senses and the senses are for the intellect and the 
intellect is for the heart so that the heart be 
ornamented with the knowledge of Allah. 

When this thing is fully borne in mind a man 
will possess wealth to the extent of need and spend it 
in valid expenses. 

The second antidote is that a man should keep 



973 



vigilance of his income that no unlawful or doubtful 
element mixes in it and that it is not earned in a 
manner which is not befitting human conduct; such as 
bribery and begging.etc. 

The third antidote is that a man should keep an 
eye on the quantity of wealth, and should not collect 
more than his need. Whatever is beyond need it 
should be made a provision for the Hereafter and 
given to the poor. If a man is not able to sacrifice (and 
give preference to other's needs over his own need) 
then he should spend it where there is need to spend 
wealth. 

The fourth antidote is to watch the expenses. 
There should be no extravagance in expenditure. He 
should be content and spend only in good deeds. It is 
so because to spend extravagantly is just like earning 
through unlawful means. 

The fifth antidote is to make ones intention 
correct in the matter of earning, expenditure and 
saving. 

Earning should be to get feedom for worship. 
Expenditure should be to become free from the world 
and keeping the heart free from being busy in world. 
The saving should be for the sake of religion. 

When a man will behave in the above manner 
the wealth will cause no harm to him. Such a wealth 
will prove an antidote and not a poison. 

Amir al-Mu'minin sayyidina 'AH al-Murtada 
(Allah be pleased with him) said: "If a man obtains the 



974 



wealth of the whole earth of Allah Almighty (with the 
objective and) for the sake of Allah, he is an abstinate 
(zahid); despite being the most rich of the world; and if 
he discards the wealth of the whole earth but not for 
the sake of Allah, he is not an abstinate although 
outwardly he remains attentive to worship and the 
hereafter". 

In this sense all acts like taking food, drink, and 
even going to ease oneself become acts of worship. 
Hence intention should be correct and valid. 

Most .of the people lack knowledge of these 
cures and even when they know they do not act upon 
them. Hence, it is better to remain away from the 
wealth as far as possible as even if the multiplicity may 
not be the cause *of proud and ignorance, it is 
definitely the cause bf reducing in ranks of the 
Hereafter, and it is not a less loss. 

Hadrat Abdal-Rahman bin 4 Auf (Allah be 
pleased with him) left much wealth at the time of his 
death. Most of the companion^ stated that they were 
fearing concerning him due to multiplicity of wealth. 
On that Hadrat Ka'b al-Ahbar (Allah be pleased with 
him) said: 

■ # 

"Glory be to Allah! There is no cause for fear. 
He earned the wealth lawfully and spent it for the 
cause of truth at proper place and whatever he left 
behind was lawful. Hence there is nothing to fear in it" 

When Hadrat Abu Zar Ghafari (Allah be 
pleased with him) learnt about this incident he came 



975 

out in anger with a bone of camel in his hand and 
started searching Had.at Ka'b al-Ahbar (Allah be 
pleased with him) to kill him. Who became afraid of 
him and took refuge in the house of Amir-ul-Muminin 
Hadrat Uthman (Allah be pleased with him) Hadrat 
Abu Zar Ghafari (Allah be Pleased with him) followed 
him and said "O son of a Jew,! you state that what 
loss is there in the wealth left behind by Abdal-Rahman 
bin 'Auf (Allah be pleased with him) although one day 
the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) was going to and I was with him had said 
"O Abu Zar! "I submitted "I am present, O Messenger 
of Allah!" (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
He said, "The wealthy people will be the most 
insignificant and in loss on the Day of Judgement 
except a person who throws the wealth right and left, 
front and back and spends it. O Abu Zar! I do not 
want to possess wealth many times more than the 
Uhad (Mountain) and to spend it in the way of Allah 
and when I depart from this world I may be possessing 
two Qirats". When the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) has said such thing 
(about the wealth) how you 0' son of a Jew said 
otherwise. You are a lair". No one (present there) 
dared to refuse the statement of Hadrat Abu Zar (Allah 
be pleased with him). 



Once an army, of camels fully loaded with goods 
came from Yaman to Madinah. It was a big news 
Hadrat 'A'ishah (Allah be pleased with her) asked as to 
what was the matter. The people told about it. On that * 
she said; "The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him) stated the truth." This news 
reached Hadrat 'Abdal-Rahman bin *Auf (Allah be 



976 



pleased with him) and he became worried about this 
and he came to Hadrat 'Ai'shah (Allah be pleased with 
her) and submitted; "What was the statement of the 
Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him). She disclosed that he (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) said, "1 was shown Paradise 
and I found needy friends entering the Paradise 
runningly and 1 did not see my rich friends and when 1 
saw 'Abdal-Rahman bin 'Auf (Allah be pleased with 
him) he entered the Paradise fallingly". Hearing this 
Hadith this Hadith of the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him) Abdal-Rahman 'bin 
Auf (Allah be pleased with him) gave in the way of 
Allah all those camels alongwith the loaded-goods and 
freed all the slaves, so that he may enter Paradise with 
the needy-friends of the Holy Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him). 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) had said to 'Abdal-Rahman bin 'Auf 
(Allah be pleased with him) "Among the rich of my 
Ummah, thou shall be the first to enter into the 
Paradise but thou will enter into it with great efforts. 

A big companion (Allah be pleased with him) 
used to say, "1 do not want to earn one thousand 
dinars lawfully and to spend them in the way of Allah 
so that I may not be deprived of congregational prayer 
or some other excellence". The people asked"Why?" 
He replied; "Allah Almighty will ask me at the place of 
accountability 'O my servant! From where you got it 
and where you spend it'. 1 do not have the power to 
face accountability." 



977 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) said; "A person will be brought on the 
Day of Judgement who had earned wealth by unlawful 
means and also spent it unlawfully. He shall be sent to 
the Hell. Then another person will be brought who 
had earned wealth lawfully but spent it unlawfully. He 
shall also be sent to Hell. Thereafter a third person will 
be brought who had earned wealth unlawfully but 
spent it at lawful place. He shall also meet the same 
consequence. Thereafter a fourth person will be 
brought whose earning was lawful and spending was 
also lawful. Concerning him it will be commanded,. 
"Make him stop as perhaps he might have committed 
some fault in earning lawfully or he might have 
committed some negligence in the matter of Taharat 
(cleanliness) or Ruku (bowing) or Sujud (prostration) 
or had not offered his prayer validly or in time." The 
said person will submit, "I earned lawfully, spent 
validly, did not commit any negligence in the 
performance of my duty and did not express any 
proud due to the wealth." It will be said, "There is 
possibility that you have used a ride or dress and 
walked on the earth proudly. He will submit; "O Allah! 
It has not been so." Again it will be said: "Perhaps you 
might have committed some slackness in the matter of 
some orphan or needy or neighbourer's right." 

He will submit: "0 Allah! It was not so. I had 
fully paid the rights of all." At that time all the people 
who had right against him will call and submit "O 
Allah! Thou blessed this man with Thy favours.' He 
should be questioned about our rights." Thus he will 
be questioned regarding each and every right and if he 
replied satisfactorily, then he will be commanded to 



978 



remain standing and to show what gratitude he 
expressed for such favours as the morsal he had taken, 
the dress he had worn etc. He will be put to 
accountability regarding each and every thing. This is 
the reason that even general people from among trte 
past did not like the wealth, because even if there 
would be no punishment the accountability would be 
regarding each and every thing. The Holy Prophet 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) who was 
the leader of the Ummah, liked to adopt Faqr so that it 
may be known to the Ummah that Faqr is better. 

Hadrat 'Imran bin Hasin (Allah be pleased with 
him) stated that he had the privilege to remain in the 
service of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of 
Allah be upon him), who said to me one day, "Let us 
go for asking health of Hadrat Fatimh (Allah be 
pleased with her). When we reached her door, he 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) knocked at 
the door and said: "Assalamu 'Alaikum" and asked 
permission to come in. The permission was given. He 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) said: "I am 
with an other person." Hadrat Fatimah (Allah be 
pleased with her) submitted; "0 Messenger of Allah! 
(peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) I have no 
other cloth on my body except a blanket". The Holy 
Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said, "Wrap it around your body." She submitted: "1 
have warpped it but still there is nothing to cover my 
head." 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) threw his own sheet of cloth and 
directed her to cover her head with it and thereafter 



979 



went in side and asked about her health. She (Allah be 
pleased with her) submitted: "I am sick as well as 
hunger-stricken which adds to the trouble and there is 
nothing to eat." He (Peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) started weeping and said, "My daughter, 
observe patience. By the token of Allah! I have not 
eaten any thing since 3 days and my rank is more than 
yours. Had I made a demand He (the Almighty) 
would have definitely given to me but I have preferred 
the Hereafter over the world". He (Peace be upon 
him) put hancl on her shoulder and said Glad-tiding be 
to you that you are the Chief of the ladies of the 
Paradise". She (Allah be pleased with her) submitted: 
"What is the status of hadrat Asiyah (The wife of 
Fir'aun) and Hadrat Maryam". 

He (Peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 
said: "They are the Chief of the ladies of their time 
respectively. You all will be decorated with gold and 
silver and there will be no noise nor pain." He (Peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) further said, "My 
daughter I have married you with my cousin who is 
the Chief in both the worlds." 

A man submitted to Hadrat' Isa (peace be upon 
him) that he wanted to live in his company and started 
walking with him. They reached in a town where they 
got 3 pieces of bread. They ate 2 pieces of bread and 
one was left behind. From there Hadrat' Isa (peace be 
upon him) went to some other place and when he 
returned he did not find the remainder bread. He 
questioned the said man but he showed his ignorance. 
From there Hadrat Isa (peace be upon him) proceeded 
fruther and found a she-deer with two issues. He 



980 

(peace be upon him) called one of them and it came 
toward him. He slaughtered it. It roasted itself there 
and then, both ate to their full. After that Hadrat'lsa 
(peace be upon him) said to that issue deer, "Be 
Alive". It became alive and went away. Thereafter 
Hadrat' Isa(peace be upon him) said to that man, "By 
the token of Allah! who showed you this miracle tell 
me where is that bread." He again showed his 
ignorance. They proceeded further and reached near a 
river. He got hold the hand of that man and both 
walked on the surface of the water. Thereafter Hadrat' 
Isa (peace be upon him) said to that man, "By the 
token of that Being who showed you this miracle tell 
me where was the bread" He again showed his 
ignorance. They proceeded further and reached near a 
place where there was sand, Hadrat'lsa (peace be 
upon him) collected the sand and said to it to become 
gold and it became gold. He (peace be upon him) 
divided it into 3 parts and said to that man, "One 
portion is mine and the other is yours and the third is 
his who has taken away the bread". The said man in 
the greed of gold confessed having eaten the bread. 
Hadrat Isa (peace be upon him) gave the whole gold 
to him and went away. Thereafter two other persons 
came and wanted to kill him to get that gold. He made 
earnest appeal that he should not be killed and that 
the gold may be distributed equally amongst the three. 
It was so distributed and one of them was sent to bring 
food. He went to bring food but on the way he 
changed his intention and brought the food mixed with 
poison so that he may alone get the whole gold. 
Meanwhile the two decided to kill him and when he 
reached back they actually killed him and thereafter 
they both ate the food full of poison and they also 



981 

died. The gold remained there. Hadrat' Isa (peace be 
upon him) happened to pass that way and found the 
gold lying there alongwith three dead bodies. Seeing 
this Hadrat 4 Isa (peace be upon him) said "O friends, 
this world is like this hence be away from it." 

This story shows that how much expert a man 
may be, it is better for him to remain aloof from the 
wealth and should not go near it. However, one may 
take it to the extent it is sufficient for him. It is so 
because a snake catcher is always killed by a snake- 
bite. (Allah knows the best). 

THE CURE OF LOVE OF ESTEEM AND THE 
HARMS OF ESTEEM. 

It should be remembered that many people 
have been destroyed due to seeking esteem, fame and 
appreciation of them by the creation (the people). 
Many disputes, enmities and sins are caused due to 
these. The moment such a longing appears, in a man 
he goes astray. His heart fills with hypocrisy and bad 
morals. 

The Holy Prophet (Peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) said: 

"The love of esteem and wealth grows 
hypocrisy in the heart as the water grows greenary." 

He (Peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) 

said, 

"Two hungry wolves do not cause that much 
destruction which is caused by the love of esteem and 
wealth in the heart of a Muslim". 



982 



The Holy Prophet (Peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon upon him) said to Hadrat 'All (Allah be 
pleased with him) Two things have destroyed the 
creation (the people), the following of the desire and 
the desire of self-appreciation. Only such person can 
get rid of it who is not the seeker of name and fame 
and who remains content upon anonymity." Allah 
Almighty says, 

( AT : * 6CJ ^ j J>$ 

That is the Last House, which We make 
for those who do not desire elation in the 
earth .nor disorder. ... (28:83) 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) said, 

"The people of Paradise are those who sit on 
the earth, having ungroomed hair, wearing rags, not 
respected by any one, not permitted to call upon the 
rich people.none giving hand in marriage to them, 
' none being ready to pay heed to their talks, and their 
urges being sub-sided within their hearts but on the 
Day of Judgement when their light will be distributed 
the entire creation will be benefitted with it." 

A poet says: » 

"Do not look down upon those who are 
sitting on the dust in this world as you do 



983 

not know as to there being a horse-rider 
in this dust." 

The Holy Prophet (Peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him) said: "Many persons who are sitting in 
the dust and wearing old torn rugs are such that if they 
take an oath concerning any thin.Allah Almighty will 
prove them true in their oath. He (Peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) said: 

"Many people are such that if they beg from 
you a Dinar, a Dirham or even a seed of corn, 
you will not give it to them but if they ask 
Paradise from AllSh.He will grant them and if 
they ask the world from Him, He will not give. 
It is not that they are disgraced. (Rather the 
world is as such)." 

Hadrat' Umar Faruq (Allah be pleased with him) 
came in the mosque and found Hadrat Mu'az (Allah 
be pleased with him) weeping. He asked him the cause 
and he replied hat he heard the Holy Prophet (Peace 
and blessings of Allah be upon him) saying, "A little 
show is also a shirk", and Allah Almighty loves such 
righteous persons who when disappear, no one goes in 
search of them; and if they appear no one identifies 
them. Their hearts are such lamps of guidance which 
are free from all doubt and darkness." 

Hadrat Ibrahim bin Adham (blessings be upon 
him) said: 

"A man who likes name and fame is not perfect 
from the point of faith." 



984 



Hadrat Ayub (peace be upon him) said: "The 
sign of truthfulness is that a man should not desire to 
be identified." 

Many pupils of Hadrat Ubayy bin Ka'b (Allah be 
pleased with him) used to march behind him. Hadrat 
'Umar Faruq (Allah be pleased with him) striped him. 
He submitted: "0 Commander of the faithful! what are 
you doing.?" He said: Such a behaviour of a person 
causes disgrace to those who march behind him and 
cause pride in him who is walking ahead of them." 
Hadrat hasan Basri (blessings be upon him) said: 
"Where a foolish sees others following him.his heart 
does not remain on a secure path in any circumstance. 

Hadrat Ayyub (peace be upon him) was going 
somewhere and some people started walking behind 
him. He said, 

"Had Allah Almighty not known this fact that I 
dislike it, I would have feared His Anger." 

Hadrat Sufyan Thauri (blessings be upon him) 

said: 

"Our predecessors did not like such clothes, 
whether old or new, that could become the 
focus of people. Rather a man should be such 
that none might mention him." 

Hadrat Bishar Haft (blessings be upon him) said, 

"A man who likes name, fame, show and 
esteem his faith is doomed in all circumstances." 



985 



THE NATURE OF ESTEEM 

As the richness signifies that a man should own 
wealth and property which should be in his possession 
and control, similarly a man of esteem is one for 
whom the hearts of people are sub-dued and his 
control over the hearts of the people should prevail. 
When heart of some on follows another, his body and 
wealth also become his followers. The heart does not 
become a follower without having good faith (Husn-i- 
Aqidat). When the greatness of any one enters in the 
heart of a man due to any of his perfections e.g. due 
to knowledge and worship or good moral or for any 
other such reason which the people consider as 
perfection, then it should be understood that the heart 
has become his follower. After this a man praises such 
person and remains prepared to serve him bodily and 
does not hesitate to sacrifice his property, for him. As 
a slave is a sub-ordinate of his master so the said 
person remains the desciple and sub-ordinate of a man 
of esteem. Rather a slave is sub-ordinate under 
compulsion while this man is sub-ordinate with sincere 
attachment. Thus the objective behind wealth (of other 
people) is to own things, and the objective behind 
esteem is to own the hearts. There are many persons 
to whom the esteem is dearer than the wealth. There 
are different causes for it which can be classified into 3 
causes. 

Firstly, the wealth is loved as it fulfils the needs 
i.e. it is a mean to fulfilling the needs. The same is true 
about the esteem. Rather for the man of esteem the 
attainment of wealth is easy as a mean person cannot 
get esteem and honour by means of his wealth (This 
was true during the period of Imam Ghazali (blessings 



986 



be upon him) Now, in our age, the wealth is 
considered every thing. How strange it is). 

Secondly, there Is apprehension of wastage of 
wealth or its being taken away by thieves or being all 
spent away. There is no such apprehension in the 
matter of esteem. 

Thirdly, the wealth Increases by the labour put 
by way of trade and commerce etc. while the esteem 
penetrates and goes on increasing. It is so because a 
man whose heart is attached with you, goes on 
praising you throughout the world and the people 
become the prey of attachment with you without 
seeing you. The more the fame will increase the more 
will be the increase in esteem. Consequently your 
followers and the heart attatched with you will 
increase. As the wealth is the objective and dear so is 
the esteem. Both are the means to fulfil the needs. It 
depends upon the nature of art individual that he 
might be desiring within his heart even that people of a 
certain city may also became attached with him where 
he himself cannot reach. It is a great mystery. Man is 
from amongst the essence of angels and the affairs of 
Allah, as Allah Almighty says, 

( A o : Je »V I/O f '& 

Say: The Spirit is by command of my 
Cord. (17 : 85) 

As man is more appropriate to the 
sustainership, hence he seeks the manner of 
sustainership. 



987 



The Pharoah said, 

(Tt:OP>) Ojlft'&W 

I (Pharaoh) am your Lord, the Most High. 

(79 : 24) 

Thus the demand and desire of it, is present in 
the heart of every person. Hence, by nature the 
sustainership is dear to every person. It signifies that he 
wants to be every thing himself and exclusively because 
when there will be any one besides him it will not be 
perfection and will be an imperfection. The sun has 
perfection as it is one and the whole light is due to it. 
Had there been another sun, it would not have been 
perfection. And the perfection that it should be all and 
every thing and none other should be that thing is the 
peculiarity of Allah, the Most Truthful Alone. It is so 
because in reality He alone is existant. There is none 
other existant except He. Whatever is there it is the 
light of His Power. It is His follower and not His 
associate and partner as the light of the sun is His 
follower, and not His equal or associate or partner. 
Thus the nature of a man is such that he desires to be 
himself every thing. As it is not withim his power, 
hence he wants that every thing should be his 
subordinate which is also not possible as the existing 
things are of two kinds. Firstly, those on which the 
control of man is not possible like the Heaven, Starts, 
Angels, satans and which is in the bottom of rivers or 
depths of the mountains. Thus it is the desire of man 
to cover them through his knowledge so that if actual 
control of all things is not in his power then at least 
those may come under the control of his knowledge. 
Therefore, it is his desire that the Kingdom of Heavens 



988 

and Earth and the wonders of waters and lands and 
whatever there is should be. known to him. Thus a 
man who is unable to lay the bridgesheet still wants 
that he may know it is spread as it is also a kind of 
control and possession. 

Scondly, there are certain existing things on 
which a man can have control. Besides the surface of 
earth, the vegetation, the animals and the minerals etc. 
are of this kind. Concerning these things the heart of 
man is very subtle and wants that all these may be 
under his sub-ordination and full control. So that those 
may remain ever busy in his rememberance. Meaning 
of esteem are also the same. The sustainership is loved 
by man by nature as the connection with it attracts 
towards it. The meaning of sustainership is that one 
may have all the perfection. A perfection is obtained 
by full control. The full control of man is linked with 
knowledge and power. And the power of man is on 
account of wealth and esteem, hence this is the cause 
of love of wealth and esteem. 

SECTION: 

If any one argues that when it is the nature of 
man to seek the perfection of sustainership which 
cannot be obtained without knowledge and power and 
to seek knowledge is a good thing and he seeks 
perfection, hence the seeking of wealth and esteem is 
not bad as it is also seeking of a kind of power. The 
power is one of the perfections and is an attribute of 
Allah Almighty like the knowledge. The more a man 
becomes perfect, the more- he is nearer to Allah. The 
answer to this argument is that no doubt the 
knowledge and power are things of perfection and 



989 



attributes of Allah. But so far as man is concerned he 
can get the real knowledge but cannot get the real 
power. A knowledge is such perfection whose 
realization is possible for man but it is not the matter in 
the case of the power. A knowledge after obtainment 
remains with man but its not so in the matter of 
power. Apparently a man considers that he has 
gained power but the said gain is not permanent and 
continuous. It is so because the power is related to the 
wealth and creation and on death its chain is 
disconnected. A thing which expires on death is not 
called by anyone as Remaining virtues . Hence 

is search of it spending of time is unwise. Thus the 
power is useful to the extent it is a means to the 
realization of knowledge. The knowledge is related to 
soul and not to body and so far as the soul is 
concerned it is eternal. When people of knowledge 
depart from this word the knowledge goes with them. 
It is such a light on account of which the people of 
knowledge will enjoy the bliss of seeing their Lord, and 
will be blessed such deliciousness as against of which all 
favours of the Paradise will be nothing. Knowledge is 
not such a thing that expires on account of death as it 
is neither connected with wealth nor creation. It is 
connected with the Being and the Attributes of Allah 
Almighty. And the wisdom of Allah Almighty which is 
in the kingdom and sovereignty and the knowledge is 
also of the wonders of the "Ma'qulat" which are all the 
permissible, obligatory and impossible. And all these 
things are eternal and everlasting as these do not 
change. Hence, whatever is obligatory is not impossible 
and an impossible is never permissible. The knowledge 
which relates to creation and the mortal thing is not 
worthcounting e.g. the knowledge of diction is 



990 



accidental and mortal. Its worth and value is only for 
the reason that it is the source of understanding of the 
Quran and the Hadith, which is a source of knowledge 
of Allah Almighty and by means of it the vallies which 
fall in the way of Allah Almighty are crossed. Thus the 
knowledge of the changing and expiring things is not 
an objective per se. Rather they are sub-ordinate to the 
eternal knowledge and the eternal knowledge is of the 
lasting virtues. 

The Being of Allah Almighty is eternal. The 
change has no scope in it. Thus the more a man will 
' gain skill in eternal sciences the more he will be near to 
the Divine Being. Therefore, the knowledge of man is 
real but his power is not real. However, there is a kind 
of power which is counted amongst the lasting virtues 
and that is named as the freedom. It means to be free 
from vain-desires, because a man who is their salve. 
Whatever he needs it causes an imperfection, hence 
the freedom from desire and power over-lusts is such a 
perfection that it is nearer to the attributes Allah and 
the angels in the sense that due to it a man remains 
away from the change and the need. And more a man 
is away from them the more he is nearer to the angels. 
In fact one perfection is knowledge and gnosis while 
the other perfection is to be free from the clutches of 
desire. So far as the wealth and esteem are concerned 
those are neither a perfection nor remain after death. 
Thus the seeking of perfection by men is not bad 
rather it is necessary. Rather a creation is commanded 
to do so. The unfortunate thing is that the people are 
ignorant of the real perfection and a thing which is not 
perfection in reality has been considered by them as 
perfection. They are after it (the unreal perfection) 



991 

leaving behind the real perfection. As all men are 
going on the path of imperfection, hence Allah 
Almighty says, 

( r « > : j-*di) 'aCJtJi jl^ilt j 

By the Age, Man is surely is loss. 

(103 : 1,2) 



SECTION; 

The esteem and wealth are things almost alike. 
Every wealth is not bad, hence its presence to the 
extent of sufficing is necessary for the way of 
Hereafter. Where a heart is fully absorbed into wealth 
then it become a decoit of the way of the Hereafter. 
The same is the circumstance of the esteem. A man 
needs a servant to assist him. He also needs a king 
who may save him from the oppressors. He also needs 
status arfd respect amongst the people to a certain 
exent. For the realization of these objectives the desire 
of esteem is not bad to the extent of sufficing as 
Hadrat Yousuf (peace be upon him) had said: 



(0 : uuiji) 



Lo! I am a skilled custodian. (12 : 55) 

Similarly, where the teacher does not have 
value and worth he will not teach attentively and a 
student who has no respect in his heart for his teacher 
will not be able to get education from him. Thus it is 
clear that the wealth, the seeking of esteem to the 
extent of sufficing is not bad. 



992 



There are four ways to seek the esteem. Two of 
them are permissible while the other two are unlawful. 
One of the two unlawful ways of seeking esteem is to 
express one's own worship as it is a show and 

unlawful. Allah Almighty alone is worthy of all 
worship. 

The second unlawful way is cheating and 
decieving i.e. to attribute oneself with an attribution 
which infact is not in oneself e.g. to link oneself with 
such parentage which is not true or to show the 
knowing of a profession which infact one does not 
know. 

One of the two permissible ways to seek esteem 
is to adopt a way in which there is no deception nor it 
is of the kind of an act of worship. The second 
permissible way is to conceal ones own defects. It is so 
because it is permissible for a sinful to conceal his 
(past) sins to get royal proximity. 

THE CURE OF LOVE OF ESTEEM. 

After dominating the heart the esteem becomes 
a disease of the heart and it needs treatment as like the 
love of wealth it attracts man towards hypocrisy, show, 
falsehood, deception, enmity, jealousy, disputation and 
sins. Rather, its sins is more than the love of wealth as 
it dominates a heart more than the wealth. A man 
who is content with so much wealth and esteem 
whereby his faith remains secure, he is not diseased. It 
is so because to do so, is not to love of the wealth and 
esteem. Rather, in reality, it is for the sake of faith. 
However, some people are such who love wealth and 



993 



esteem to such an extent that they remain indulged in 
it throughout the whole time as to how do the other 
people see them and what do the other people they 
speak about them. In whatever activity such a man is 
engaged such thoughts go on occuring in his heart. 
Under such (serious) condition the treatment of his 
heart becomes obligatory. Its treatment is both by 
means of knowledge and by means of action. The 
treatment by knowledge is that such a man should 
ponder upon the harms of esteem that come accross in 
both the worlds. The worldly harms are that the seeker 
of esteem remains victim of grief and has no time to 
come out of flattery of other people and even then 
objective is not realised and thus he becomes disgraced 
by his own conduct. And if the objective is realised the 
people become jealous of him, and he remains worried 
to save himself from the evil of his enemies. He is not 
secure from enemies. If he is dominated by them, he is 
totally disgraced and if he dominates upon them even 
then, it is not known for what period such 
circumstance will last. The reason is that the heart of 
the creation is soon satiated and the human hearts are 
like the waves of the river. Hence such honour is 
extremely weak whose basis is the heart of a few 
misfortunate. If any idea comes into the heart the said 
honour might change due to it. Particularly a man 
whose esteem is on the basis of leadership and rule it 
is of the span of a few minutes. A little rnis- 
apprehnsion in the heart of the king cause his 
dismissal. Hence, we have stated that the seeker of 
esteem remains worried in this world and the same will 
be his condition in the Hereafter. People of weak 
intellect would not understand this fact. A man who is 
endowed with perfect in sight would know it that if he 



994 



gets kingdom of East and West and he becomes the 
lord of all the, creation it is of no use because the days 
of his life are numbered and when the death wil come 
to him all that would finish like the finishing of a 
cobweb. His example is like dead kings to whom none 
remembers today. Thus circumstances for the sake of a 
few days taste to destroy and lose the eternal kingdom 
is an unwise act. It is so because a person who 
attaches his heart with esteem becomes deprived of the 
love of Allah. And a person going to hereafter, if goes 
towards it being dominated by any thing besides the 
love of Allah will become subject of severe 
punishment. This was the treatment by knowledge. 
The treatment by action includes, firstly, to run away 
from the place from where he gets esteem and to go 
to a place where he is unidentified. Infact this is a 
perfect treatment of esteem because if he sits in 
seclusion in his own homeland the people will consider 
that he has lost all honour and thus it will cause harm 
to him. Its sign is that people will criticise him and state 
that he is doing so as an act of hypocrisy, he will feel 
perturbed and grieved in his heart. If the people 
attribute any crime to him and such attribution is false 
and for saving him from being looked down upon by 
the people he puts forward excuses. It will be a proof 
that still a thorn of esteem is present in him. 

Secondly, he should become a blamed person. 
He should conduct himself in a way that people look 
down upon him. It does not mean that he should start 
eating unlawful food like foolish group. Rather, he 
should behave as an abstinent had done. The ruler of 
the city had come to greet him and to get his blessing 
through prayer. The moment he saw him coming he 



995 



called his bread and started eating it hurriedly taking 
big morsels. Seeing such a conduct the ruler 
considered him a greedy person and went back. 

An elder had got honour and acceptance in a 
city and the peopel started calling upon him. One day 
he came* out from the bathroom wearing nice clothes 
and stood on the way. People got hold of him and 
gave a severe physical beating and snatched the 
clothes from him and declared that he was a thief. 

Another elder put a syrup of the colour of wine 
in his cup so that people may consider him a wine- 
drinker and leave him alone. 

THE CURE OF THE LOVE OF PEOPLES 
APPRECIATION AND ABHORANCE OF THEIR 
COMPLAINT. 

Man is greedy for self-praise. He wants good 
name even after voilating the Shariah. If people call 
him bad he does not like such statement. This is also a 
disease of heart its cure is not possible, unless the 
causes of pleasure due to appreciation and pain due to 
criticism are not known. There are four causes of 
deliciousness of praise. 

The first cause is that which has just been stated 
above i.e. self-praise is dear to man. Praise and 
appreciation is a proof of perfection. When a man 
doubts in his own perfection, he does not get perfect 
deliciousness and the moment he hears his praise from 
the mouth of another he gets satisfaction about his 
perfection and consequently he gets comfort and 
satisfaction and full deliciousness. When without 



996 



speaking the perfection is seen, one finds sign of 
sustainership within himself. The sustainership is dear 
to man's nature. 

When he hears criticisum he comes to know of 
his own fault and defect which causes grief in his heart. 

Thus when a man hears his own praise from a 
person who is wise and does not speak-vainly, such as 
a teacher, a judge, a scholar etc. he feels more 
comfort and pleasure proportionately. When a man 
having no insight talks about him he wilt not get any 
taste as the talk of such a person is not of any value. 

The second cause is, that the praise and 
appreciation indicate that the heart of the Praiser is in 
the control and under the command of the praised 
one. It also shows that there is a great status, position 
and esteem in the heart of the praised for the praised 
one. As esteem is dear, hence, if the praised is a 
dignified personality then appreciation gives him much 
taste. It is so because control over his heart brings 
much power. On the other hand if a praiser is a mean 
person then there is no such consequence. 

The third cause is, that by praise he assesses 
that the hearts of other people have become attracted 
towards him and by the appreciation of one the other 
people will also become his appreciators, this will go 
on increasing. Further, when the appreciation is 
spontaneous and the appreciator is such whose word is 
respected by the people, then the appreciation by such 
a man is very tasty and the condemnation is very 
unpleased. 



997 

* 

The fourth cause is, that the praise is the proof 
of the fact that the one who praises is dominated by 
the fortune of the praised, and dignity itself is required 
even if it be by means of anger. It is so because even 
when the one who praises is not true follower ( ), 
even then there is some vested interest and he 
considers the perfection of power in him. If the one 
who praises makes a statement which is false and none 
is going to accept it as true there will be no taste felt in 
it. ' 

After knowing the causes, the treatment 
becomes easy and if there is an effort, an exact 
treatment is possible. 

The first cause is to believe in ones perfection 
on hearing ones praise. At such an occasion one 
should consider that although the statement made by 
the appreciator is correct but as this fact is God-given 
hence, it is God who deserves the prime praise. No 
quality comes in a man by the simple statement of 
another man nor it reduces and increases by such 
statement. And if the other man praises due to 
richness or leadership then such things are not worthy 
to become pleased with them. And if they are of such 
worthiness even then one should become happy on 
the cause of such qualities and not on the cause of 
praise. Rather a man of knowledge who is aware of his 
knowledge and piety is futile and waste. If this is the 
state of a man of knowledge then one whose abode is 
Hell, what right to be happy has he got. And when it 
is known that the thing for which one is being praised 
is not at all present in him, then to be happy on it is 
an absurdity in itself. For example, someone says so 
and so is a very popular figure. His intestines are full of 



998 



Musk and Amber. Such a statement is absolutely 
wrong because the intestines are full of feaces. To be 
happy on such praise is madness. The remaining 
causes are due to the love of esteem and pomp, 
remedy of which has already been explained above. 

If any one adversely criticises you, your 
grievance against him is unwise. Because, if he is 
speaking truly then he is an angel and if he is 
intentionally telling a lie he is a devil. And if he does 
not know that what-ever he is speaking is false then he 
is an ass and fool. If by mutilation Allah Almighty 
renders someone an angel or a devil or an ass then for 
what have you to grieve. If oh the other hand your 
critic is true then there is defect in you. If the defect is 
concerning faith then instead of becoming unhappy, 
you should take care and reform yourself. If the defect 
is concerning the world then it is not a defect, it is skill 
and perfection. 

The second treatment is that you should 
consider that in case the statement of the other person 
about you is true then in that case you should be 
obliged to him. For example, if a person says that 
there is a snake in your cloth you should be obliged to 
him. The defects in one's faith are more harmful than 
the snake as such defects cause destruction in the 
Hereafter. Further, if you are going to pay respect to 
the king and some one points out to you that your 
' clothes are impure and there is apprehension of 
displeasure of the king, In that case, therfore, you 
should be obliged to the one who has informed you 
and thereby you are saved from the wrath of the king. 
If the objective of the other person was to find out 



999 



faults and there is a truth in such finding, even then 
there is a benefit and his fault-finding is a sign of his 
faithlessness. In • a case In whclh you are gaining 
something and other is losing there is no room for 
anger on your part. 

If he is false in his fault finding in you then you 
should consider that if you are free from such fault 
then you should offer thanks to Allah as the fault- 
finder could not know many other faults present in you 
and by mentioning the said fault he gave all his virtues 
to you. If he had praised you then it would have been 
like killing you. Do you want to become happy on 
your own killing and unhappy on the gift. Such things 
are done by a person who looks on the surface only. 
Such a person remains unaware o£ the spirit behind 
the thing.while a foolish looks only the outside of a 
thing. 

In short, till the hope and greed from the 
people is not disconnected this desease will not leave. 

THE DIFFERENT LEVELS OF PEOPLE IN THE 
MATTER OF PRAISE AND CONDEMNATION 

In the matter of hearing their praise and 
condemnation, people are of four levels. 

The first level is of the common people who 
become happy on praise and unhappy or 
condemnation and become prepared to take revenge. 
This is the worst level. 

The second level is of the [pious] people, who 
become happy with praise and unhappy with 



1000 

condemnation but do not express it in the dealing. 
Outwardly, they pose that they consider them equal 
but the fact is that, within their heart, they treat one of 
them as good and the other as bad. 

The third level is of the God-fearing people, 
who keep equally both things, both by their expression 
and by their hearts. They do not consider their praiser 
as their friend and their condemner as their enemy. As 
they do not become happy over their praise and do 
not become unhappy over their condemnation. Some 
worshippers consider that they have reached this level 
but they are mistaken. The sign of reaching this level is 
that if the condemner is present before them, they 
should not feel any burden on their hearts and if he 
seeks assistance in anything they should easily and 
happily provide it to him as they would have provided 
it to the praiser and if he wants to see them, they 
should meet him as they would have met the praiser 
and if he dies, they should not leave any deficiency in 
expressing their grieve and telling his praise. If any one 
teases the condemner, they should feel the same grief 
as they would have felt for the praiser. 

If a praiser commits a mistake, he should not 
take it lightly. 

These things are very difficult and there is 
possibility that a worshipper may say that he expressed 
his anger on the condemner as by doing so he was 
becoming a sinner but in fact this is a deception of 
Satan, as there are many such people who do not 
become angry on those who commit major sin and 
blame other people. This thing Is proof of the fact that 
the cause of this anger is selfishness (Nafsaniyyat) and 



1001 



not faithfulness. And ignorant worshipper understand 
such niceties hardly. 

The fourth level is of the most truthful people 
(Siddiqin) who consider the praiser their enemy and 
the criticiser their friend. By this they get three 
advantages. 

Firstly, by this, they come to know of their own 
fault, and it becomes easy for them to remove 
it; 

Secondly, the criticiser (by criticising gives his 
own virtues to the criticised); and. 

Thirdly, the (criticiser by his criticism excites the 
criticised) to become free from (all the pointed 
out) faults. 

The Holy Prophet (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him) said, 

"A pity be for such a person who observers 
fasts, offers Tahajjud prayer and wears rough 
clothes except that his heart becomes free from 
the world and he considers his praise bad and 
his criticism good." 

If this Hadith is valid then the matter is very 
severe as to reach such levej is extremely difficult. 
Rather to reach even the second level is difficult that a 
man may not distinguish outwardly even if in his heart 
he desires such. Because generally it so happens that 
when any matter and dealing is to be made a man 
inclines towards his follower (Murid) and appreciator 
(Madih) . Only such person reaches the last level who is 



1002 



enemy to his ownself to the extent that he becomes his 
own enemy that is when he hears his fault has been 
found he becomes happy and accepts the fault finder 
as wise, just as a man becomes happy on hearing any 
fault found in his enemy. This quality is very rare. 
Rather if a man struggles for the whole of his life that 
in his eye his appreciator and criticiser become equal 
even then he will reach this level hardly. The cause of 
danger in this behalf is that when he will create a 
distinction between the appreciation and criticism, the 
seeking of appreciation will dominate his heart and 
such a man will coin excuses and it is exactly possible 
that he may start committing show in the worship and 
will commit even a sin to get his own vested interest. 
The Hadith of the Holy Prophet (peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him) quoted above is perhaps for the 
reason that till the love of the world and appreciation 
do not vacate the heart totally it is difficult to save 
oneself from the sin. Rather such a man is quickly 
involved in sin However, to abhor the false crjticism 
and to like the true appreciation are not unlawful in 
themselves, provided that no other mischief or evil is 
not created. Most of the sins are committed by the 
people due to their liking their appreciation and 
disliking their criticism. People are always after it that 
whatever they do it should appease the other people 
but When such an attitude becomes a routine a man 
commits uncalled tfor deeds. However, to appease 
people without shdwVand sin is not bad or unlawful. 



(Allah knows the best) 



BOOKS ALL SORTS 

Produced & Fvnnrf,.,! hv 



MALIK SIRAJUDDIN & SONS 



( Kashmir, Bazar, Lahore/8, Pakistan 

t ■ j££ r Mal1, Lahorc - Pakis '»" 
